LNCS 14295  Sharib Ali · Fons van der Sommen ·
            Maureen van Eijnatten ·
            Bartłomiej W. Papiez˙ ·
            Yueming Jin · Iris Kolenbrander (Eds.)

            Cancer Prevention
            Through Early Detection

            Second International Workshop, CaPTion 2023
            Held in Conjunction with MICCAI 2023
            Vancouver, BC, Canada, October 12, 2023, Proceedings
Lecture Notes in Computer Science                             14295

Founding Editors

Gerhard Goos
Juris Hartmanis

Editorial Board Members

Elisa Bertino, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA
Wen Gao, Peking University, Beijing, China
Bernhard Steffen , TU Dortmund University, Dortmund, Germany
Moti Yung , Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
The series Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS), including its subseries Lecture
Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (LNAI) and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics (LNBI),
has established itself as a medium for the publication of new developments in computer
science and information technology research, teaching, and education.

    LNCS enjoys close cooperation with the computer science R & D community, the
series counts many renowned academics among its volume editors and paper authors, and
collaborates with prestigious societies. Its mission is to serve this international commu-
nity by providing an invaluable service, mainly focused on the publication of conference
and workshop proceedings and postproceedings. LNCS commenced publication in 1973.
Sharib Ali · Fons van der Sommen ·
Maureen van Eijnatten · Bartłomiej W. Papiez˙ ·
Yueming Jin · Iris Kolenbrander

Editors

Cancer Prevention
Through Early Detection

Second International Workshop, CaPTion 2023
Held in Conjunction with MICCAI 2023
Vancouver, BC, Canada, October 12, 2023
Proceedings
Editors                                    Fons van der Sommen
Sharib Ali                                 Eindhoven University of Technology
University of Leeds                        Eindhoven, The Netherlands
Leeds, UK
                                           Bartłomiej W. Papiez˙
Maureen van Eijnatten                      University of Oxford
Eindhoven University of Technology         Oxford, UK
Eindhoven, The Netherlands
                                           Iris Kolenbrander
Yueming Jin                                Eindhoven University of Technology
National University of Singapore           Eindhoven, The Netherlands
Singapore, Singapore

ISSN 0302-9743                        ISSN 1611-3349 (electronic)

Lecture Notes in Computer Science

ISBN 978-3-031-45349-6                ISBN 978-3-031-45350-2 (eBook)

https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45350-2

© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license
to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023

This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of
the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation,
broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information
storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now
known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the
editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors
or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁliations.

This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

Paper in this product is recyclable.
                                Preface

CaPTion 2023 was the 2nd International Workshop on Cancer Prevention through early
detecTion, organized as a satellite event of the 26th International Conference on Medical
Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention (MICCAI 2023) in Vancouver,
Canada. The main idea of founding CaPTion was to create a new research interface where
medical image analysis, machine learning, and clinical researchers could interact and
address the challenges related to cancer and early cancer detection using computational
methods.

    Early cancer diagnosis and its treatment for the long-term survival of cancer patients
have been a battle for decades. 19.3 million cancer cases and almost 10 million deaths
were reported in 2020, with lung (18%), colorectal (9.4%), liver (8.3%), stomach (7.7%)
and female breast cancer (6.9%) being the leading causes of mortality. While computa-
tional methods in medical imaging have enabled the detection and assessment of can-
cerous tumors and assist in their treatment, early detection of cancer precursors opens
an opportunity for early treatment and prevention. The workshop provided an oppor-
tunity to present research work in medical imaging around the central theme of early
cancer detection. It strove to address the challenges that must be overcome to translate
computational methods to clinical practice through well-designed, generalizable, inter-
pretable, and clinically transferable methods. Through this new workshop, we aimed
to identify a new ecosystem that would enable comprehensive method validation and
reliability of methods, setting up a new gold standard for sample size and elaborating
evaluation strategies to identify failure modes of methods when applied to real-world
clinical environments.

    The CaPTion 2023 proceedings contain 11 high-quality papers of between 10 and 14
pages selected through a rigorous peer review process (with an average of three reviews
per paper). All submissions were peer-reviewed through a double-blind process by at
least three members of the scientiﬁc review committee, comprising 21 experts (including
chairs) in the ﬁeld of medical imaging, especially of early cancer detection.

    The accepted manuscripts cover various medical image analysis methods primarily
focused on cancer and early cancer detection, progression, inﬂammation understanding,
multimodality data, and computer-aided navigation. In addition to the papers presented
in this LNCS volume, the workshop included three keynote presentations from world-
renowned experts: Sir Mike Brady (University of Oxford, UK), Anne Martel (University
of Toronto, Canada), and Sravanthi Parasa (Swedish Medical Center, Seattle, USA).

    We wish to thank all the CaPTion 2023 authors for their participation and the
members of the scientiﬁc review committee for their feedback and commitment to the
vi  Preface

workshop. We are very grateful to our sponsors Satisfai Health Inc. for their valuable
support.

October 2023                Sharib Ali
              Fons van der Sommen
              Maureen van Eijnatten
               Bartłomiej W. Papiez˙

                          Yueming Jin
                    Iris Kolenbrander
                    Pedro Chavarrias
                       Organization

Program Committee Chairs

Sharib Ali                  University of Leeds, UK
Fons van der Sommen         Eindhoven University of Technology,

Maureen van Eijnatten          The Netherlands
                            Eindhoven University of Technology,
Bartłomiej W. Papiez˙
Yueming Jin                    The Netherlands
Iris Kolenbrander           University of Oxford, UK
                            University College London, UK
                            Eindhoven University of Technology,

                               The Netherlands

Student Representative Board Members

Iris Kolenbrander           Eindhoven University of Technology,
Pedro Chavarrias               The Netherlands

                            University of Leeds, UK

Keynote Speakers            University of Oxford, UK
                            University of Toronto, Canada
Sir Michael Brady           Swedish Medical Center, Seattle, USA
Anne Martel
Sravanthi Parasa

Scientiﬁc Review Committee

Pedro Chavarrias            University of Leeds, UK
Christian Daul              Université de Lorraine, France
Mariia Dmitrieva            Queen Square Analytics, UK
Noha Ghatwary               University of Lincoln, UK
Mark Janse                  UMC Utrecht, The Netherlands
Tim Jaspers                 Eindhoven University of Technology,

                               The Netherlands
viii  Organization

Carolus Kusters      Eindhoven University of Technology,
                        The Netherlands
Daneil Lang
Van Linh Le          Helmholtz Center Munich, Germany
Gilberto Ochoa-Ruiz  University of Bordeaux, France
Mansoor Ali Teevno   Tecnológico de Monterrey, Mexico
Christiaan Viviers   Tecnológico de Monterrey, Mexico
                     Eindhoven University of Technology,
Ziang Xu
Jiadong Zhang           The Netherlands
                     University of Oxford, UK
                     ShanghaiTech University, China
                               Contents

Classiﬁcation

A Deep Attention-Multiple Instance Learning Framework to Predict
Survival of Soft-Tissue Sarcoma from Whole Slide Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

   Van-Linh Le, Audrey Michot, Amandine Crombé, Carine Ngo,
   Charles Honoré, Jean-Michel Coindre, Olivier Saut,
   and Francois Le-Loarer

Towards Real-Time Conﬁrmation of Breast Cancer in the OR Using
CNN-Based Raman Spectroscopy Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

   David Grajales, William Le, Frédérick Dallaire, Guillaume Sheehy,
   Sandryne David, Trang Tran, Frédéric Leblond, Cynthia Ménard,
   and Samuel Kadoury

Fully Automated CAD System for Lung Cancer Detection
and Classiﬁcation Using 3D Residual U-Net with multi-Region Proposal
Network (mRPN) in CT Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29

   Anum Masood, Usman Naseem, and Mehwish Nasim

Image Captioning for Automated Grading and Understanding of Ulcerative
Colitis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40

   Flor Helena Valencia, Daniel Flores-Araiza, Obed Cerda,
   Venkataraman Subramanian, Thomas de Lange, Gilberto Ochoa-Ruiz,
   and Sharib Ali

Detection and Segmentation

Multispectral 3D Masked Autoencoders for Anomaly Detection
in Non-Contrast Enhanced Breast MRI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55

   Daniel M. Lang, Eli Schwartz, Cosmin I. Bercea, Raja Giryes,
   and Julia A. Schnabel

Non-redundant Combination of Hand-Crafted and Deep Learning
Radiomics: Application to the Early Detection of Pancreatic Cancer . . . . . . . . . . 68

   Rebeca Vétil, Clément Abi-Nader, Alexandre Bône,
   Marie-Pierre Vullierme, Marc-Michel Rohé, Pietro Gori,
   and Isabelle Bloch
x  Contents

Assessing the Performance of Deep Learning-Based Models for Prostate
Cancer Segmentation Using Uncertainty Scores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83

   Pablo Cesar Quihui-Rubio, Daniel Flores-Araiza,
   Gilberto Ochoa-Ruiz, Miguel Gonzalez-Mendoza, and Christian Mata

MoSID: Modality-Speciﬁc Information Disentanglement
from Multi-parametric MRI for Breast Tumor Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94

   Jiadong Zhang, Qianqian Chen, Luping Zhou, Zhiming Cui, Fei Gao,
   Zhenhui Li, Qianjin Feng, and Dinggang Shen

Cancer/Early cancer Surveillance

Colonoscopy Coverage Revisited: Identifying Scanning Gaps in Real-Time . . . . 107
   George Leifman, Idan Kligvasser, Roman Goldenberg, Ehud Rivlin,
   and Michael Elad

ColNav: Real-Time Colon Navigation for Colonoscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
   Netanel Frank, Erez Posner, Emmanuelle Muhlethaler, Adi Zholkover,
   and Moshe Bouhnik

Modeling Barrett’s Esophagus Progression Using Geometric Variational
Autoencoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132

   Vivien van Veldhuizen, Sharvaree Vadgama, Onno de Boer,
   Sybren Meijer, and Erik J. Bekkers

Author Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
Classiﬁcation
         A Deep Attention-Multiple Instance
      Learning Framework to Predict Survival
     of Soft-Tissue Sarcoma from Whole Slide

                               Images

Van-Linh Le1,2,3,8(B), Audrey Michot3,5, Amandine Cromb´e1,4,6, Carine Ngo9,
             Charles Honor´e10, Jean-Michel Coindre4,7, Olivier Saut1,2,
                                  and Francois Le-Loarer3,4,7

               1 MONC Team, INRIA Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, Talence, France
                     2 Bordeaux Mathematics Institute UMR 5251 (IMB),

            University of Bordeaux, CNRS and Bordeaux INP, Talence, France
                                      van-linh.le@u-bordeaux.fr

                  3 Bordeaux Institute of Oncology, BRIC U1312, INSERM,
            University of Bordeaux, Institute Bergoni´e, 33000 Bordeaux, France

             4 Faculty of Medicine, University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France
      5 Department of Oncological Surgery, Institute Bergoni´e, Bordeaux, France
      6 Department of Radiology, Pellegrin University Hospital, Bordeaux, France

             7 Department of Pathology, Institute Bergoni´e, Bordeaux, France
   8 Department of Data and Digital Health, Institute Bergoni´e, Bordeaux, France

         9 Department of Pathology, Institute Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France
  10 Department of Oncological Surgery, Institute Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France

         Abstract. Soft-tissue sarcomas are heterogeneous cancers of the mes-
         enchymal lineage that can develop anywhere in the body. A precise pre-
         diction of sarcomas patients’ prognosis is critical for clinicians to deﬁne
         an adequate treatment plan. In this paper, we proposed an end-to-end
         Deep learning framework via Multiple Instance Learning (MIL), Deep
         Attention-MIL framework, for the survival predictions: Overall survival
         (OS), Metastasis-free survival (MFS), and Local-recurrence free survival
         (LRFS) of sarcomas patients, by studying the features from Whole Slide
         Images (WSIs) of their tumors. The Deep Attention-MIL framework con-
         sists of three steps: tiles selection from the WSIs to choose the relevant
         tiles for the study; tiles feature extraction by using a pre-trained deep
         learning model; and a Deep Attention-MIL model to predict the risk score
         for each patient via MIL approach. The risk scores outputted from the
         Deep Attention-MIL model are used to divide the patients into low/high-
         risk groups and predict survival time. The framework was trained and
         validated on a local dataset including 220 patients, then it was used to
         predict the survival for 48 patients in an external validation dataset. The
         experiments showed the proposed framework yielded satisfactory and
         promising results and contributed to accurate cancer survival predictions
         on both the validation and external testing datasets: By using the WSIs

O. Saut and F. Le-Loarer—Co-directed the research.

c The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
S. Ali et al. (Eds.): CaPTion 2023, LNCS 14295, pp. 3–16, 2023.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45350-2_1
4  V.-L. Le et al.

   feature only, we obtained an average C-index (of 5-fold cross-validation)
   of 0.6901, 0.7179, and 0.6211 for OS, MFS, and LRFS tasks on the vali-
   dation dataset, respectively. On the external testing dataset, these scores
   are 0.6294, 0.682, and 0.76 for the three tasks (OS, MFS, LRFS), respec-
   tively. By adding the clinical features, these scores have been improved
   both on validation and external testing datasets. We obtained an aver-
   age C-index of 0.7835/0.6378, 0.7389/0.6885, and 0.6883/0.7272 for the
   three tasks (OS, MFS, LRFS) on validation/external testing datasets.

   Keywords: Multiple Instance Learning · Deep Attention model ·
   Survival prediction · Soft-tissue sarcoma · Whole Slide Image

1 Introduction

Soft-tissue sarcomas (STS) are heterogeneous malignant tumors developing any-
where in the body. They represent 1% of cancers in adults and 5% in children.
STSs have a variable prognosis, their management requires the use of aggres-
sive treatments including debilitating surgeries and/or high-dose chemothera-
pies. The prognosis of STS is dominated by two events: local recurrence and
distant metastasis. The occurrence of metastasis is a major adverse factor for
overall survival (OS), but local control of the disease also impacts OS [1]. In most
studies, the most signiﬁcant factor to predict local recurrence is the quality of
surgical margins [1], whereas metastasis and overall survival are mostly related
to the FNCLCC histological grade [2] which remains to date the most widely
used standard to predict survival of sarcoma patients. A clinical nomogram inte-
grating the grade and clinical variables such as patient age and tumor size has
improved the prognosis evaluation of sarcomas patients [3].

    In addition to biological and clinical information, Whole Slide Images (WSIs)
contain information relevant for analyzing the diagnosis and prognosis of cancer,
e.g., Overall survival (OS), Metastasis-free survival (MFS), or Local-recurrence
free survival (LRFS), as well as prediction of response to treatment. WSIs can
indeed assess the tumor growth and morphology in detailed, high resolution.
However, capturing cell detail makes the exported image potentially cumbersome
to cope with, and analyzing WSIs challenging for several reasons: (1) WSIs may
contain a billion diﬃcult pixels to process computationally; (2) a patient could
have several WSIs for study, with signiﬁcant diﬀerences in texture and biological
structures; (3) we receive an only label at the patient level but diﬀerent WSIs
for diagnosis.

    Deep learning has become a current solution for image processing applica-
tions comprising pathological image analysis. However, the processing of WSIs is
diﬀerent from usual images due to the massive resolution of this kind of image.
One possible solution to overcome this challenge is to consider a weakly super-
vised method via a Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) approach [4]. In MIL,
we split a WSI into non-overlapping tiles (patches). Therefore, a WSI could be
considered a bag of tiles. It is not mandatory to analyze all tiles, as some of
them may not be relevant for diagnostic detection; therefore, a subset of tiles is
selected for the study.
A Deep Attention-MIL Framework to Predict Survival of Soft-Tissue  5

    In recent years, Deep Learning via MIL [5] has emerged as a promising way
to predict survival in cancer patients by analyzing the WSIs [6,7]. Ilse et al.
[6] have proposed to use the attention-MIL for classifying the histopathological
images of breast and colon cancers datasets: the model with attention operator
outperformed the other operators (e.g., max-pooling MIL or mean-pooling MIL),
achieving an average AUC (of 5 folds cross-validation) of 0.775 and 0.968 in
breast and colon cancers datasets, respectively. Yao et al. [7] have introduced
a combination of a Siamese model [8] and an attention-based one to predict
survival based on imaging features. The method used the K-Means algorithm
[9] to cluster the imaging features into several phenotypes. Then, the Siamese
model was used to extract the features for each phenotype before feeding to the
attention module for aggregating the WSI-level feature. Finally, the aggregated
WSI feature was processed by two fully-connected layers and outputted the risk
score for each patient. The method was applied to lung and colorectal cancer
datasets. The C-indexes on lung and colorectal datasets were 0.6963 and 0.652,
respectively. Likewise, Pierre et al. [10] have proposed the MesoNet model to
predict the OS of mesothelioma patients. To develop their model, they ﬁrstly
splitted the WSIs into tiles with a size of 224 × 224 pixels and selected 10K of
tiles for analysis due to the limitation of the computation memory. Secondly,
the pre-trained ResNet50 [11] was used to extract the features of the tiles. Then,
a convolutional one-dimensional was used to generate the score for each tile.
Finally, the 10 highest and 10 lowest scores were selected and used as the input
for the multi-layer perceptron classiﬁer to provide the scores for each patient.
MesoNet has achieved an average C-index of 0.642 and 0.643 on the training
(2981 patients) and testing dataset (56 patients), respectively [10].

    In this work, we report an end-to-end framework, Deep Attention-MIL, to
predict the survival of sarcomas patients. At the heart of our framework is a
deep learning model with an attention mechanism for survival prediction via
MIL. We evaluate the proposed framework on two datasets originating from two
diﬀerent comprehensive cancer centers in France. In this work, we show that
the framework oﬀers satisfactory predictions of the survival probability of the
patients compared to the gold standard used sarcomas patients, the FNCLCC
histological grade [12] (Sect. 3.2).

2 Methodology

Figure 1 presents the workﬂows of the proposed framework. It was developed in
three phases: ﬁrstly, the non-overlapping patches (tiles) were extracted from the
WSIs of the patients. Then, a pre-trained deep learning model (e.g., ResNet50
[11]) was used as an encoder to extract the features from the tiles. Finally, the
extracted features were fed into the deep learning survival model to predict the
risk score for each patient. The risk scores were then taken by a non-parametric
estimator (e.g., Kaplan-Meier [13]) to predict the survival probability for the
patient.
6  V.-L. Le et al.

                        Fig. 1. The workﬂow of the proposed framework

2.1 Tiles Extraction

A WSI is organized as a pyramid of images with diﬀerent magniﬁcation levels,
the image at the highest level (40× of magniﬁcation) could have a resolution
of 100K × 100K pixels, and it is down-sampled over the magniﬁcation levels.
Usually, the image at the highest magniﬁcation level (40×) is chosen for study.
It is worth noting that a large part of the image does not contain any tissue, and
is therefore useless for analysis. These regions are discarded during the tiling
process. Because of the problem with high resolution of the original image, it is
impossible to apply the classical image processing techniques on whole image for
pre-processing step. Instead, an image at a lower magniﬁcation level (e.g., 12×,
scaled image) is used to perform the pre-processing operations (e.g., segmen-
tation, binarization), to select the tissue area, and to determine and mark the
location of the interesting tiles. At the end of this stage, the tiles on the original
image corresponding to the selected tiles on the scaled images are extracted and
used for the study.

    As a preferred size from the deep learning models for image classiﬁcation
[11,14], the original image is divided into non-overlapping tiles with a size of
224 × 224 ( W × H) pixels. Based on the fraction of tissue, tiles are classiﬁed
into 4 groups: Group A consists of the tiles that are composed of more than 80%
of tissue, group B contains the tiles which have more than 10% and less than
80% of tissue, group C includes the tiles which have more than 10% of tissue,
and group D of that tiles that do not contain tissue. In the context of this work,
the tiles composed of more than 10% (from group A and B) of tissue have been
used for our analysis. As mentioned, a patient could have several WSIs, even if
we only extract tissue tiles, we can still get hundreds of thousands of tiles for
each patient.

2.2 Features Extraction

Unlike segmentation and detection tasks in WSIs analysis [15–17], our framework
predicts patient-level outcome aggregated from tile-level information. As pointed
A Deep Attention-MIL Framework to Predict Survival of Soft-Tissue  7

out in [18], training patch-based CNNs for weakly supervised learning is very
time-consuming (several weeks), we propose to use features from pre-trained
models instead of using CNNs to learn features from scratch. Here, for instance,
we use a pre-trained ResNet50 [11] on ImageNet [14] as an extractor to extract
the features of the tiles. For each tile, 2048 features are considered. Then, the
extracted features are concatenated to obtain the features for each patient. The
extracted features of WSIs are presented as a matrix of (N × 2048), where N is
the total number of WSI tiles.

2.3 Deep Attention-Multiple Instance Learning Model for Survival
       Prediction

Figure 2 illustrates the proposed deep learning architecture (Deep Attention-
MIL) for survival predictions. The layers of this model can be decomposed into
three groups: the ﬁrst group consists of the layers before the Attention module
[6]. These are used to aggregate the features for each tile as well as compute the
score for each tile; the second group is an Attention module [6] which outputs
the attention score for each tile. These scores present the importance of each
tile conducted to the ﬁnal prediction. The attention score is combined with the
corresponding tile features before passing it to the layers in the last group to
estimate the risk score for each patient.

                  Fig. 2. The proposed Deep Attention-MIL survival model

    Our model is derived from other studies [6,7] with modiﬁcations to adapt the
architecture to our objective. First, we replaced the ReLU activation function
with PreLU activation, which is more precise in the decision by making the
leakage coeﬃcient a parameter that is learned along with the other network
parameters [19]. Then, to prevent overﬁtting, we added dropout layers [20] at
the end of each group of layers, and reduce the number of features in the last layer
of the model. It is worth that the ﬁnal model was obtained after trying diﬀerent
combinations of layers and performing experiments on the same dataset.

    Table 1 details the input/output dimensions at each layer/module of the pro-
posed Deep Attention-MIL survival model. The input of the model is the selected
features of the patient, organized as a matrix of (M ×2048) where M is the num-
ber of tiles considered. After passing the layers in the ﬁrst group, the features of
each tile are collected and dimension is reduced to 256. These reduced features
are inputted to the attention module to output the attention score for each tile
8  V.-L. Le et al.

   Table 1. The input/output dimensions at each layer of the survival model.

   Layer             Input  Output

   Conv1D/PreLU/Dropout M × 2048 M × 512

   FC/PreLU/Dropout  M × 512 M × 256

   Attention module  M × 256 1 × 256

   FC                1 × 256 1

(1 × M ). The attention score is multiplied with corresponding tile features to
obtain the representation feature for WSI (1 × 256) which is the input for the
last layer in the model. Finally, a linear function learns the representation of
WSI to provide the risk score for the patient.

Attention Module: Local representation (two layers before the attention mod-
ule) encodes features of the tiles, but our model provides the score at the patient
level. Therefore, aggregating tile features into patient-level representation is a
necessary step. A popular choice would be to use the maximum or the mean
operator. Yet, the drawbacks are clear: they are pre-deﬁned and not trainable
which might not be adequate for this speciﬁc task. A better way to integrate tile
information is to leverage an attention mechanism that considers the importance
of each tile. In this work, we proposed to use the attention based MIL for aggre-
gation of tile features to obtain the representation of patient-level [6]. It consists
of two linear layers combined with Tanh activation functions. A soft-max activa-
tion function is placed at the end of the module to compute the attention score
for each tile, and ensure that the sum of all attention scores is equal to 1.

3 Experiments and Results

3.1 Dataset Description and Experimental Setups

Datasets: The experiments were carried out on two diﬀerent clinical
cohorts from two comprehensive cancer centers: Institute Bergoni´e (Bor-
deaux, France) (IB dataset) and Gustave Rossy (Villejuif, France) (IGR
dataset). These two cohorts were extracted from the Sarcoma BCB
(https://sarcomabcb.org:connect). The criteria of inclusion included: primary
sarcoma, location of trunk walls and limbs, upfront surgical resection, and patient
naive of neoadjuvant therapy. The IB dataset consisted of 220 patients with
more than 450 WSIs representing at least 2 WSIs per patient. The samples in
this dataset were collected from 01/01/1990 to 01/12/2020. The IGR dataset
consisted of 48 patients with more than 100 WSIs collected from 01/01/2000 to
01/12/2016. For all included patients, clinical follow-up was updated regarding
survival, date of death, occurrence of metastasis and local recurrence. The IB
dataset was used to train and validate the models. The IGR dataset was used
          A Deep Attention-MIL Framework to Predict Survival of Soft-Tissue  9

as an external validation cohort (testing dataset). Table 2 details the number
of patients, number of WSIs, recorded events of patients, location for collecting
samples for each dataset.

Ethics: This study was conducted following local ethical guidelines and
approved by the institutional research board of our institutions; all cases are
recorded in the French expert sarcoma network (NetSarc+) database, which is
approved by the National Committee for Protection of Personal Data (CNIL,
no. 910390).

                         Table 2. The details of studied datasets.

Dataset                  IB                    IGR

No. patients             220                   48

No. WSIs                 450                   105

No. patients alive/dead  133/87                36/12

No. patients non-metastatic/metastatic 148/72  37/11

No. patients non-recurrence/recurrence 188/32  40/8

Location                 Institute Bergoni´e (Bordeaux, France) Institute Gustave Roussy (Villejuif, France)

Experiments Setup: We evaluated the performance of the model on three
survival tasks: Overall survival (OS), Metastasis free survival (MFS), or Local-
recurrence free survival (LRFS). For each task, we performed a 5-fold cross-
validation on the training dataset (IB). Then, the 5 corresponding models were
used to predict the scores for the patients in the external validation set. (IGR).
For all three tasks, we reported the C-index and Conﬁdence Interval (CI-95%).
The reported C-index in this study was the average C-index of 5-fold cross-
validation.

    As mentioned in Sect. 2.1, each patient had a hundred thousand tiles. For
clear computational reasons, we could not analyze all tiles; therefore, we selected
a subset of tiles (M = 10K) for the study. This value is empirically set after trying
diﬀerent values for the number of tiles for each patient. As the output of this
step, each patient was represented as a matrix of (M × 2048), this matrix was
used as the input of the survival model.

Implementation Details: The model was implemented in the PyTorch library
[21]. The model was trained for 200 epochs using an Adam optimization [22] with
a weight decay of 10−4. The learning rate and batch size have been set to 3×10−3
and 1, respectively. An early stopping strategy was applied by monitoring the
validation loss to avoid over-ﬁtting.

3.2 Experimental Results

In this section, we investigate the performance of our approach. First, we present
the model’s performances on tile features only for three survival tasks: OS, MFS,
10  V.-L. Le et al.

and LRFS. Then, we add more insight to the model by considering some clin-
ical features, compare the two approaches (with and without clinical features).
Finally, these results are compared to the results of a Cox model [23], a standard
model for survival prediction.

Table 3. The C-index scores (± CI-95%) for OS, MFS, and LRFS tasks on IB valida-
tion and IGR testing datasets (with WSI features only).

    Dataset OS       MFS                   LRFS

    IB  0.6901 (± 0.0388) 0.7179 (± 0.0709) 0.6211(± 0.0537)

    IGR 0.6294 (± 0.0153) 0.6820 (± 0.0491) 0.7600(± 0.0184)

Prediction from Tiles Features: Table 3 presents the obtained average C-
index (±CI-95%) for each task on each dataset. On the validation set (IB), we
obtained the average C-index scores of 0.6901 (±0.0388), 0.7179 (±0.0709), and
0.6211 (±0.0537) for OS, MFS, and LRFS tasks, respectively. On the external
validation set (IGR), the average C-index scores on OS and MFS tasks are
lower than the validation set, 0.6294 (±0.0153) and 0.682 (±0.0491) for OS and
MFS, respectively. However, the C-index on LRFS outperforms the score on
the validation set 0.76 (±0.0184). Although the C-index scores are a bit smaller
on the test set, the diﬀerence is tiny. This could indicate a good generalization
ability of our approach to unseen data.

    As mentioned, the model provided the risk (event) score for each patient.
Then, the risk scores were used to divide the patients into two groups: low-risk
and high-risk, using Eq. 1. Finally, an estimator (e.g., Kaplan-Meier [13]) was
used to obtain the survival probability of the two groups.

                                        0  if P x < P I       (1)
                     dx = f (x) =
                     1 if P x ≥ P I

where P x is the predicted risk score from the model and P I is the median of
the risk scores.

    Figure 3 illustrates the survival curves (in 10 years) of low/high-risk patients
by using the Kaplan-Meier estimator [13] for each task on the IB validation
dataset and the IGR testing dataset. On the IB validation dataset (left column in
3),the statistical information between the two groups was signiﬁcant (p < 0.05),
and the predictions of our model were good enough to separate the patients.
The prediction curves were compared to the Grade curves (Grade is a gold
standard to classify cancer tissues based on their appearance and behavior when
viewed under a microscope for helping the doctor know about the aggressiveness
of cancer. The grade is usually described using a number from 1 to 3 or 4. The
higher the number, the more diﬀerent the cancer tissues look from normal tissues
and the faster they are growing), the curves provided by our scores are the same
A Deep Attention-MIL Framework to Predict Survival of Soft-Tissue  11

Fig. 3. The survival curves on IB validation (left column) and IGR testing (right
column) datasets. From top to bottom: the survival curves on OS, MFS, and LRFS
tasks compared to the histological Grade.

level or better in some periods (e.g., from 5 to 6 years). On the external cohort
(IGR) (right column in Fig. 3), the stratiﬁcation for OS and MFS were similar
to grade and a bit better for LRFS.

Adding Clinical Features to Imaging: This section presents the results
of the enhanced version of the proposed deep learning model. In this version,
we consider additional clinical features beside the imaging features. In order to
compare to another approach on clinical features, clinicians have selected four
clinical features: age, size of tumor, grade, and histotype, to add to the tiles
features for the prediction of survival.

    Table 4 summaries the C-index (± CI-95%) for each task on each dataset.
On the validation dataset (IB), the C-index is improved on all three survival
tasks: OS - 0.7835 (±0.034), MFS - 0.7389 (±0.034), LRFS - 0.6883 (±0.037).
On IGR dataset, the scores for three survival tasks are: OS - 0.6378 (±0.043),
12  V.-L. Le et al.

MFS - 0.6885 (±0.033), LRFS - 0.7272 (±0.068). It is the same improvement
on OS and MFS tasks. However, the improvement in IGR was not as large as
expected from the validation set results, even the score was decreased a little bit
on LRFS task. To explain the diﬀerence, we hypothesized that we have a bias
between the clinical data of the patients from the two centers.

Table 4. The C-index scores (± CI-95%) of OS, MFS, LRFS tasks on IB validation
and IGR testing datasets (with WSI and clinical features).

    Dataset OS       MFS              LRFS

    IB  0.7835 (± 0.034) 0.7389 (± 0.034) 0.6883 (± 0.037)

    IGR 0.6378 (± 0.043) 0.6885 (± 0.033) 0.7272 (± 0.068)

    Using the same strategy to evaluate the prediction scores as presented in the
previous section, the output scores of the model are used to split the patients
into low/high-risk groups. Then, we illustrate the two group curves by using the
Kaplan-Meier estimator (Fig. 4). On the IB dataset, the survival curves on OS
and MFS tasks are signiﬁcantly separate, and they are the same level as the
grade curves; on the LRFS task, the model met diﬃculty to split the patients in
the ﬁrst period of 5 years. The survival curves (for three tasks: OS, MFS, and
LRFS) on the IGR dataset are not signiﬁcantly changed compared to the curves
without clinical features. It seems that adding the clinical has more eﬀect on the
IB (C-index scores) than the IGR dataset.

    In addition to the risk score, proposed model also provides the attention score
for each tile, which allows us to predict the survival pattern before predicting the
risk score. Figure 5 illustrates the top 15 tiles of a patient who had a metastatic
relapse, these tiles with high attention scores are the ones aﬀecting the most
the model prediction. Among these, 4 interested normal tissue surrounding the
tumor, 9 originated from the tumor, and 2 normal tissue far from the tumor.

Comparison with the Cox Model: Cox model [23] is a popular model for
the prediction of survival. We have used the Cox model with two objectives: (1)
to verify the informative value of tile encoding, is it enough for use as a feature
in a survival model? (2) to compare the performance of our framework with a
classical method for survival tasks.

    Table 5. The C-index scores from Cox model on OS, MFS, LRFS tasks.

    Dataset OS MFS LRFS Nb. features

    IB  0.7455 0.6835 0.7216 4 features (clinical)

    IGR 0.57 0.7049 0.7381

    IB  0.7591 0.7071 0.7274 5 features (clinical + risk score)

    IGR 0.5733 0.74 0.7279
A Deep Attention-MIL Framework to Predict Survival of Soft-Tissue  13

Fig. 4. The survival curves (in 10 years) on IB (left column) and IGR (right column)
datasets by using imaging and clinical features. From top to bottom: the survival curves
on OS, MFS, LRFS tasks.

Fig. 5. Top-15 tiles with highest attention score of a metastasic patient from IB dataset.
The blue boxes highlights tiles of normal tissue surrounding the tumor tissue. (Color
ﬁgure online)
14      V.-L. Le et al.

    The Cox model was trained on the IB dataset and tested on the IGR dataset.
We ﬁrst try the Cox with 4 clinical features. Then, we used the outputs of deep
learning model (risk score) on WSI features as the ﬁfth feature on the Cox model.
Table 5 shows the C-index scores on three tasks from two datasets (IB/IGR). We
see from the results that adding the tile features has improved the performance
of the Cox model. On the validation set, the Cox model has obtained a C-
index of 0.7455, 0.6835, and 0.7216 for OS, MFS, and LRFS tasks, respectively,
by utilizing clinical features. By adding the deep learning risk score, these C-
indexes have improved to 0.7591, 0.7071, and 0.7274 for OS, MFS, and LRFS
tasks, respectively. In addition, the C-index scores have been improved as well
on the testing set. Besides that, in the comparison between the results of Cox
model (5 features) and proposed Deep Attention-MIL model, our results on the
validation set are better than the Cox model on OS and MFS tasks, while we
are close to Cox’s result on the LRFS task.

Comparison with Other Deep Learning Survival Models: To have an
objective assessment of the performance of the model, we have re-implemented
the methods which have described in [10] and [6]. Then, we performed 5-fold
cross-validation and reported the average values of the C-index on IB dataset.
Table 6 shows the prediction power of the proposed framework compared to the
diﬀerent survival models based on the average C-index scores of 5-fold cross-
validation on diﬀerent survival tasks. We see from the table that the perfor-
mance of our proposed framework on OS and MFS tasks outperforms the other
methods, while we are less than a little bit on the LRFS task compared to the
Attention-based MIL average pooling approach. Generally, the proposed frame-
work achieves the best performance among all methods on most of survival tasks.

Table 6. Performance comparison of the proposed framework with other available
methods using average C-index scores (± CI-95%) of OS, MFS, and LRS tasks on IB
validation set. The bold values indicate the best scores for each task.

Method                         OS  MFS  LRFS

Deep Attention-MIL (proposed)  0.6901 (± 0.0388) 0.7179 (± 0.0709) 0.6211 (± 0.0537)

MesoNet [10]                   0.6118 (± 0.0531) 0.6134 (± 0.0283) 0.5881 (± 0.0790)

Attention-based MIL [6] Max-pooling 0.5905 (± 0.0211) 0.6333 (± 0.1061) 0.5255 (± 0.0477)

Attention-based MIL [6] Average-pooling 0.6468 (± 0.0609) 0.6535 (± 0.0671) 0.6444 (± 0.0454)

4 Discussion and Conclusion

In this paper, we propose a Deep Attention-MIL framework for survival predic-
tions from WSIs. Our objective was to investigate the role of the WSIs for the
prognostic tasks along the clinical features. First, we have built a baseline from
the Cox model, which took into account the clinical only. Then, the deep learn-
ing risk score obtained from WSIs features was added to the analysis of the Cox
A Deep Attention-MIL Framework to Predict Survival of Soft-Tissue  15

model. In this study, we show that imaging adds some fascinating insight into
the Cox analysis, and that it can improve the performance of the Cox model.
Finally, we propose a fully deep learning framework to combine the tile and clin-
ical features for survival prediction in sarcoma patients. Our framework achieved
good performance for various survival prediction tasks, even better results than
the Cox model, and comparable to the gold standard for cancer studies. The
results have been also compared to several deep survival models, the compari-
son showed that our framework achieves higher performance than these methods.
One should keep in mind that this model may apply to sarcoma patients aﬀected
with any sarcoma histotypes developed in the trunk walls and the limbs naive
of treatment.

    The present study raises some questions that we plan to address in future
works. (1) Concerning the feature extraction step, one may replace the current
extractor with another extractor that retains a relation with studied images,
for example, we are examining a self-supervised learning model which can be
downstream to use as an extractor. (2) We plan on analyzing the eﬀect of the
origins of the tiles on the tile selection step, in which we are ongoing to automate
the classiﬁcation of the tiles from diﬀerent regions. (3) One needs to investigate
the variability of the WSIs coming from various centers to improve the model’s
performances and develop an adequate harmonization method.

Acknowledgements. This work was supported by grants from the SIRIC Bordeaux
and the Fondation Bergoni´e. This study is carried out in collaboration between the
MONC team, Inria Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, and the BRIC U1312.

References

 1. Casali, P.G., et al.: Soft tissue and visceral sarcomas: Esmo-euracan clinical prac-
     tice guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann. Oncol. 29, iv51–iv67
     (2018)

 2. Coindre, J.-M., Terrier, P., Bui, N.B., et al.: Prognostic factors in adult patients
     with locally controlled soft tissue sarcoma: a study of 546 patients from the French
     federation of cancer centers sarcoma group. Journal of Clinical Oncology 14(3),
     869–877 (1996)

 3. Callegaro, D., et al.: Development and external validation of two nomograms to
     predict overall survival and occurrence of distant metastases in adults after sur-
     gical resection of localised soft-tissue sarcomas of the extremities: a retrospective
     analysis. Lancet Oncol. 17(5), 671–680 (2016)

 4. Herrera, F., et al.: Multiple Instance Learning. Springer, Heidelberg (2016).
     https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-47759-6

 5. Dietterich, T.G., Lathrop, R.H., Lozano-P´erez, T.: Solving the multiple instance
     problem with axis-parallel rectangles. Artif. Intell. 89(1), 31–71 (1997)

 6. Ilse, M., Tomczak, J., Welling, W.: Attention-based deep multiple instance learn-
     ing. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2127–2136. PMLR
     (2018)

 7. Yao, J., Zhu, X., Jonnagaddala, J., Hawkins, N., Huang, J.: Whole slide images
     based cancer survival prediction using attention guided deep multiple instance
     learning networks. Med. Image Anal. 65, 101789 (2020)
16  V.-L. Le et al.

 8. Chopra, S., Hadsell, R., LeCun, Y.: Learning a similarity metric discriminatively,
     with application to face veriﬁcation. In: 2005 IEEE Computer Society Conference
     on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2005), vol. 1, pp. 539–546.
     IEEE (2005)

 9. MacQueen, J., et al.: Some methods for classiﬁcation and analysis of multivariate
     observations. In Proceedings of the Fifth Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical
     Statistics and Probability, Oakland, CA, USA, vol. 1, pp. 281–297 (1967)

10. Courtiol, P., et al.: Deep learning-based classiﬁcation of mesothelioma improves
     prediction of patient outcome. Nat. Med. 25(10), 1519–1525 (2019)

11. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., Sun, J.: Deep residual learning for image recognition. In
     Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
     pp. 770–778 (2016)

12. Coindre, J.M., et al.: Predictive value of grade for metastasis development in the
     main histologic types of adult soft tissue sarcomas: a study of 1240 patients from
     the French federation of cancer centers sarcoma group. Cancer: Interdisc. Int. J.
     Am. Cancer Soc. 91(10), 1914–1926 (2001)

13. Kaplan, E.L., Meier, P.: Nonparametric estimation from incomplete observations.
     J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 53, 457–481 (1958)

14. Russakovsky, O., et al.: ImageNet large scale visual recognition challenge. Int. J.
     Comput. Vision (IJCV) 115(3), 211–252 (2015)

15. Courtiol, P., Tramel, E.W., Sanselme, M., Wainrib, G.: Classiﬁcation and disease
     localization in histopathology using only global labels: a weakly-supervised app-
     roach. preprint arXiv:1802.02212 (2018)

16. Rony, J., Belharbi, S., Dolz, J., Ayed, I.B., McCaﬀrey, L., Granger, E.: Deep
     weakly-supervised learning methods for classiﬁcation and localization in histology
     images: a survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.03354 (2019)

17. Wang, D., Khosla, A., et al.: Deep learning for identifying metastatic breast cancer.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.05718 (2016)

18. Hou, L., Samaras, D., Kur¸c, T.M., Gao, Y., Davis, J.E., Saltz, J.: Eﬃcient multiple
     instance convolutional neural networks for gigapixel resolution image classiﬁcation,
     vol. 7, pp. 174–182 (2015). preprint arXiv:1504.07947

19. He, K., Zhang, X., et al.: Delving deep into rectiﬁers: surpassing human-level per-
     formance on imagenet classiﬁcation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International
     Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1026–1034 (2015)

20. Srivastava, N., Hinton, G., Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., Salakhutdinov, R.:
     Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overﬁtting. J. Mach. Learn.
     Res. 15(1), 1929–1958 (2014)

21. Paszke, A., et al.: Automatic diﬀerentiation in pytorch. In: NIPS-W (2017)
22. Kingma, D.P., Ba, J.: Adam: a method for stochastic optimization. arXiv:1412.6980

     (2014)
23. Cox, D.R.: Regression models and life-tables. J. Royal Stat. Soc. Ser. B (Method-

     ological) 34(2):187–202 (1972)
           Towards Real-Time Conﬁrmation
           of Breast Cancer in the OR Using
           CNN-Based Raman Spectroscopy

                          Classiﬁcation

         David Grajales1,2(B) , William Le1,2 , Fr´ed´erick Dallaire1,2 ,
           Guillaume Sheehy1,2 , Sandryne David1,2 , Trang Tran1,2 ,
     Fr´ed´eric Leblond1,2,3 , Cynthia M´enard2 , and Samuel Kadoury1,2

                        1 Polytechnique Montr´eal, Montr´eal, QC, Canada
                          david-orlando.grajales-lopera@polymtl.ca

        2 Centre de recherche du Centre Hospitalier de l’Universit´e de Montr´eal,
                                          Montr´eal, QC, Canada

                   3 Institut du Cancer de Montr´eal, Montr´eal, QC, Canada

         Abstract. Breast-conserving surgery is a recommended treatment for
         early-stage breast cancer. Recurrence and post-operative complications
         are potential risks when margins are not entirely removed during surgery
         or when timing constraints in the OR limit extensive analysis of resected
         tissue. Raman spectroscopy (RS), a non-destructive optical technique,
         enables the acquisition of molecular signatures of tissue samples allowing
         conﬁrmation of diﬀerent diseases, including cancer. Typically, the mea-
         sured spectra must be processed and used to train conventional machine
         learning classiﬁers for cancer/normal discrimination. However, there is a
         lack of real-time spatially-resolved information that allows conﬁrmation
         of cancer at a speciﬁc site during surgery. In this paper, we propose a
         tissue characterization pipeline based on convolutional neural networks
         (CNN), using 4 × 1D convolutional layers for automated feature extrac-
         tion and a fully-connected layer as an alternative to classifying the com-
         plete RS spectra (without previous feature selection). Using 169 samples
         collected from 20 patients, we evaluated the performance of the pro-
         posed model, achieving an accuracy and sensitivity of 0.93(0.01) and
         0.94(0.02), respectively, improving over traditional SVM-based models.
         Results demonstrate the potential of CNN models for classiﬁcation in
         the OR and highlight the value of eﬃcient signal processing to enhance
         their use for in-situ cancer detection.

       Keywords: Raman spectroscopy · Breast cancer · Convolutional

         neural networks

1 Introduction

It is estimated that each year, 287,850 women are diagnosed with invasive breast
cancer in the US alone [9]. Breast-conserving surgery (BCS) is one of the most

c The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
S. Ali et al. (Eds.): CaPTion 2023, LNCS 14295, pp. 17–28, 2023.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45350-2_2
18  D. Grajales et al.

suitable surgery techniques for early-stage cancer for both ductal carcinoma in
situ (DCIS) and invasive cases [11,14,22]. The success rate of standard of care
procedures depends considerably on the presence of residual tumor in the remain-
ing mammary gland. However, due to the diﬃculty in visual discrimination of
healthy from invasive cancer cells, incomplete excision can lead to recurrence and
require additional surgery. While macroscopic evaluation of the margins is often
performed intraoperatively, positive margins are still detected in up to 20–35%
of cases during postoperative staging [11,12,14,24].

    Currently, the lack of accurate real-time intraoperative techniques to detect
cancer cells at the margins has motivated several studies to evaluate various tis-
sue properties [17,18,24]. One such technique, Raman spectroscopy (RS), char-
acterizes microscopic information providing real-time molecular signatures by
taking advantage of the tissue’s highly sensitive optical imaging properties [2,8].
Based on inelastic light scattering, RS has proven useful for ex-vivo characteriza-
tion of several diseases including Alzheimer’s, cardiovascular diseases and brain
cancer [1,5,16], despite being a weak signal [13,23]. Furthermore, the devel-
opment of optical ﬁber RS probes and the imaging modality’s non-destructive
nature favor its clinical usage [1,25] by facilitating the integration into exist-
ing workﬂows [10]. Nevertheless, the major limitation of integrating RS for true
real-time analysis within the operating room (OR) is its dependency on domain-
speciﬁc signal processing and feature selection steps [23].

    With the generated spectral signatures, classiﬁcation based on the distinctive
hand-selected peaks is typically done using machine learning methods such as
logistic regression [11] and support vector machines (SVM) [7,13,16,27], such
as in [4] for breast cancer detection, reporting sensitivity and speciﬁcity of 0.92
and 0.90 respectively. Due to the high number of features, dimensionality reduc-
tion based on principal component analysis [7,27] or feature selection using
Lasso regression are commonly used [10,15,21]. In recent years, autoencoders
(AE) have seen growing use in several medical image processing applications
[13,22]. Nonetheless, these current methods lack the task-speciﬁc automatic fea-
ture extraction properties that state-of-the-art methods such as deep learning
(DL) provide for high-dimensional inputs.

    The challenges to achieve real-time breast cancer detection are two-fold: 1)
improving feature selection to maximize cancer cell discrimination and 2) reduc-
ing the run-time requirements to allow real-time RS analysis. Currently, both
challenges require signiﬁcant human involvement in traditional workﬂows. We
propose a novel method for invasive breast cancer cell detection using an RS
system for rapid tissue characterization by leveraging a 1D CNN for automatic
feature extraction and classiﬁcation. We compare this method against 2 SVM-
based approaches on a dataset of 20 patients. Furthermore, we hypothesize that
raw RS signals can adequately be used as inputs without signiﬁcant loss in test
sensitivity thus achieving the necessary requirements for its inclusion in the OR
for breast cancer margin conﬁrmation.
Raman Spectroscopy Classiﬁcation for Breast Cancer Conﬁrmation  19

2 Related Work

In 2020, Santilli et al. [22] explored a DL approach for basal cell cancer detec-
tion using RS. In their study, the authors proposed an autoencoder (5 -fully
connected layer encoder and 5 -fully connected layer decoder) to reconstruct the
input signal and extract a latent space for classiﬁcation. Working with 127 nor-
mal and 63 cancerous tissue samples, they applied signal processing and data
augmentation to obtain 4000 samples in total, with which they trained a model
obtaining an accuracy of 0.96 in binary classiﬁcation. Moving to breast cancer,
in 2021, Ma et al. [17] proposed a binary classiﬁcation model using a single 1-
dimensional CNN layer and two dense layers; in a cohort of 20 patients, they
applied signal processing and data augmentation before the model training to
obtain 0.92 in accuracy. In their study, Fisher Discrimination Analysis (FDA)
and SVM (using diﬀerent kernels) classiﬁers were trained and tested on the same
data for comparison.

    In other ﬁelds, such as mineral and bacterial classiﬁcation, where data are not
as limited, Zhou et al. [28] trained a deeper and more complex CNN-based model
for multiclass discrimination (top-1 accuracy of 0.92). Inspired by the ResNet
architecture, the authors propose a block consisting of 4 CNN layers, dense lay-
ers, activation functions, and an identity shortcut, a block used 3 times, along
with other CNN and dense layers, to form the complete model. The mineral
dataset contained more than 5000 samples, and the bacteria dataset 60 000;
thus, data augmentation was not applied. The authors applied a relatively sim-
pler signal processing since human body tissue’s signiﬁcant autoﬂuorescence was
absent, and emphasized the challenge and potential advantages of working with
raw signals rather than processed data.

3 Materials and Methods

3.1 Clinical Data and Setup

The cohort in this study consisted of 20 breast cancer patients: 19 with a con-
ﬁrmed diagnosis of invasive cancer who underwent open breast surgery (mas-
tectomy or lumpectomy) and one undergoing breast reduction surgery. For the
latter, optical measurements were acquired on the breast in which no tumor was
radiologically detectable while still diagnosed with breast cancer associated with
a tumor, but detected in the contralateral breast. Informed consent was obtained
before the patient underwent surgery (McGill University Health Center Ethics
Committees, approval number 2021–5997). All recruited patients had a cancer
grade inferior to 4 and a tumor larger than 1 cm. The RS system used for the
ex-vivo optical measurements (Reveal Surgical, Montreal, Canada), consists of
a light source (785 nm laser), a high sensitivity spectrometer (wavelengths from
800 nm to 900 nm) and an optical probe connected to the previous two compo-
nents. This probe was a hand-held single-point RS probe system, which inte-
grates ten optical ﬁbers with a 100 µm diameter core: one central ﬁber used to
stimulate the tissue and nine used to collect tissue response. This setup allowed
20  D. Grajales et al.

the mesoscopic in-contact characterization of circular shape sites of 0.5 mm in
diameter. More details on the system can be found in previous works [4,6].

Fig. 1. Stages of the data acquisition process. The process goes from BCS to
histopathological analysis and includes handling of fresh samples and signal process-
ing. The bottom row presents the data used for training the RS classiﬁcation model
for cancer/normal discrimination, including an example of the 10 raw accumulations
and the processed spectrum for one inspected site.

3.2 Workﬂow and Data Acquisition

For training purposes, one fresh specimen per patient was inked and sliced
according to institution standards to obtain 5 mm thick slices. A pathologist
then selected 2 smaller samples (cancer and normal) per slice based on visual
inspection.

    Several optical measurements were taken on diﬀerent sites of each sample. A
measurement consisted of 10 accumulations (repeated measurements) acquired
at each location by setting the laser power to 100 mW with an exposure time
per spectrum ranging from 0.1 to 4 s; a background measurement was also made
before any accumulations with the laser oﬀ. More details on the selection of these
parameters and the interaction with the tissue can be found at [4,6].

    After RS, samples were ﬁxed and processed according to standard histopatho-
logical procedures and observed by an expert to identify cells on the stained
sample slides. The cells were reported as cancer (tumor cells, tumor stroma, or
necrosis), normal (connective tissue, stroma, ﬁbroblast, collagen), or fat (adipose
cells) on every slide. For this study, the “Normal” label was attributed to the
inspected site when at least 80% of the inspected area contained normal cells,
and “Cancer” when 80% of the surface or more were cancer cells. Samples failing
to meet these criteria, as well as fat samples, were excluded from the study.
Raman Spectroscopy Classiﬁcation for Breast Cancer Conﬁrmation  21

    The 10 accumulations were processed to obtain a single Raman spectrum per
site (see Fig. 1). This process includes averaging the accumulations, background
and cosmic rays subtraction, normalization with a NIST Raman standard (SRM
2214), autoﬂuorescence removal, standard normal variate normalization, and
assigning each pixel of the spectrometer to a Raman shift. A quantitative quality
factor (QF) metric (range: 0–1) was computed from each resulting spectrum.
Spectra with a QF metric inferior to 0.6 were excluded [3,23].

3.3 Classiﬁcation Model

In contrast to the widely used SVM methods for binary classiﬁcation of RS for
cancer detection [8,20,21,27], DL approaches have only begun to be explored in
recent years [13,17,28]. We propose a CNN-based model, fed with complete RS
signals, to be compared with some SVM-based approaches.

Proposed Model: 1D CNN. In the proposed end-to-end DL-based approach,
the selected architecture consisted of 4 × 1D convolutional layers, each followed
by a batch normalization and ReLU activation function (see Fig. 2B) for the auto-
mated feature extraction. Speciﬁcally, 1D convolutions are well suited to detect
salient peak signals and automatically extract/generate features from complete
signals [22,28]. The number of layers (3) and features (120, 60, 30) in each were
selected to maximize classiﬁcation performance while minimizing model capacity
to better adapt to smaller datasets inherent to a pilot study. For the discrimina-
tion component of the CNN, a fully-connected layer (30 features) allowed direct
training of the CNN for supervised binary classiﬁcation. The paradigm taking
raw RS signals as inputs is the fastest of all compared methods as the fully end-
to-end CNN, after training, can perform inference in near real-time (<1 s). Note
that the paradigm taking processed RS signals as inputs still requires manual
intervention to correctly tune the preprocessing steps.

Fig. 2. Architecture of the DL-based models implemented for discriminating cancer
from normal tissue using breast cancer RS: (A) alternative AE+SVM comparative
method and (B) proposed 1D CNN. The baseline SVM model which is the same as in
[4] is not shown.
22  D. Grajales et al.

Comparative Methods: SVM/AE+SVM. Previous studies have shown
the classiﬁcation power of 4 speciﬁc peaks on the processed Raman ﬁngerprint
(940 cm−1, 1004 cm cm−1, 1129 cm cm−1 and 1155 cm cm−1) with a feature
selection process based on Lasso regression [4]. We re-implemented the SVM
methodology following the parameters used by *** et al. [4] to establish our
baseline performance. An alternative method (AE+SVM) used an AE module
for dimensionality reduction (see Fig. 2A). It was initially trained oﬄine to craft
features from the raw or processed RS signal. Here, both encoders and decoders
consisted of 4 × 1D convolutional blocks as in the proposed fully CNN method
with 120, 60, 30 and 30, 60 120 features respectively. In the online training
phase, the decoder component was discarded and the encoder was ﬁxed to train
the SVM.

Implementation Details. In the proposed end-to-end DL approach, the 1D
CNN was trained for 30 epochs with Adam optimizer and a learning rate of
0.001. All convolutional layers used a kernel size of 3 and a stride of 2 as a down-
sampling strategy. Models were trained on an NVIDIA-SMI GPU with 16GB
RAM, optimizing for cross-entropy (1D CNN) loss function and implemented
using PyTorch [19].

    The AE component was trained initially oﬄine for 50 epochs with the Adam
optimizer and a learning rate of 0.001. Convolutional and transposed convolu-
tional layers with kernel size 3 and stride 2 were used for downsampling and
upsampling respectively. The minimization loss was the L1 loss for input signal
reconstruction. In the online training phase, the 30-feature latent embedding
was then used as inputs to the SVM model, implemented using Scikit-learn
[26], and trained using a linear kernel in both SVM and AE+SVM methods.
To reduce bias from training on an unbalanced dataset (see Table 1) the cost
function penalized false positives at double the weight.

Training and Evaluation. A 5-fold patient cross-validation was performed
for all experiments. The predictions and probabilities were used to compute the
area under the receiver-operating-characteristic curve (AUC), accuracy, sensi-
tivity, and speciﬁcity. The complete training-validation process was repeated 5
times for signiﬁcance testing. Thus metrics were reported as the mean and stan-
dard deviation (SD) of 5 repetitions. The performances were evaluated using a
paired Student’s t-test; a p-value <0.05 was considered a statistically signiﬁcant
diﬀerence.

    The hyperparameters of the proposed model were selected by a small abla-
tion study in which diﬀerent learning rates (0.001, 0.005, 0.01), epochs (20, 30,
60), number of layers (2, 4), and features ([n, 120, 60, 30], [n, 120, 120, 30])
were evaluated (see Appendix), with the results showing only the best model
(comparison based on AUC).
Raman Spectroscopy Classiﬁcation for Breast Cancer Conﬁrmation  23

4 Results

4.1 Clinical Data and Data Processing

In total, the dataset consisted of 169 inspected sites, with the corresponding
histopathological report used as ground truth (for training purposes) and spec-
troscopy features (see Table 1). Figure 3A–B shows the raw and processed signals,
averaged by the target class.

Table 1. Characteristics of the breast cancer patient cohort undergoing open breast
surgery for invasive carcinoma. Each acquisition site (spectral measurement) consisted
of 10 raw spectra, totaling 169 total sites.

           Age at diagnosis (Cohort n = 20)

           Median (years)               67 (range: 54–77)

           Number of sites acquisition

           Median (per patient)         6 (range: 1–25)

           Site label distribution

           Normal (> 80% normal cells) 59

           Cancer (> 80% cancer cells) 110

           Number of spectral points

           Raw RS                       854†

           Processed RS                 631

† Raw sample consists of 10 accumulations, and 854 fea-

tures per accumulation.

Fig. 3. End-to-end RS signal transformation to obtain breast cancer tissue classiﬁca-
tion. The (A) raw and (B) processed RS from 169 inspected sites were averaged by
class and plotted with the solid line; the shaded area represents the SD. (C) The ROC
curve for the proposed model (1D CNN) and the baseline (SVM).

4.2 Classiﬁcation Performance
Table 2 presents the performance of the proposed 1D CNN method compared
with the baseline (SVM) and SVM with dimensionality reduction (AE + SVM)
24  D. Grajales et al.

methods. Furthermore, the columns present the results of the 3 methods trained
on the standard processed RS inputs or the unprocessed signals (raw) aiming
to minimize run-time delays. Note that current state-of-the-art breast cancer
detection methods use SVM with processed signals and non-automatic feature
selection, obtaining an accuracy of 0.91 during ex-vivo experiments [4] and >0.96
in more controlled in-vitro experiments [27].

Table 2. Comparative results of the proposed end-to-end DL model against other
methods (5-fold, 5 repetitions cross-validation) for discriminating cancer from normal
tissue. Bold font indicates top-performing results from the respective category (col-
umn). Asterisks indicate statistically signiﬁcant improvement of the proposed model
compared SVM baseline. All ﬁgures are presented as: mean(SD).

    Model               Metric Raw RS Processed RS

    SVM                 AUC  0.82 (0.06) 0.95 (0.01)

                        Accuracy 0.78 (0.03) 0.90 (0.01)

                        Sensitivity 0.88 (0.03) 0.89 (0.01)

                        Speciﬁcity 0.57 (0.07) 0.91 (0.02)

    AE + SVM AUC             0.77 (0.04) 0.89 (0.01)

                        Accuracy 0.72 (0.02) 0.86 (0.02)

                        Sensitivity 0.83 (0.03) 0.90 (0.03)

                        Speciﬁcity 0.51 (0.16) 0.77 (0.08)

    1D CNN AUC               0.82 (0.06) 0.95 (0.03)

                        Accuracy 0.81 (0.04) 0.93 (0.01) *

                        Sensitivity 0.80 (0.05) 0.94 (0.02) *

                        Speciﬁcity 0.79 (0.04) 0.88 (0.04)

    In two of the thresholded metrics, performance of the 1D CNN showed sta-
tistically signiﬁcant improvements over baseline on processed inputs (accuracy
= 0.93 > 0.90, p < 0.05; sensitivity = 0.94 > 0.89, p < 0.05). No statistically
signiﬁcant diﬀerence was found for AUC (0.95 = 0.95, p = 0.66 ≮ 0.05) and
speciﬁcity (0.88 > 0.91, p = 0.23 ≮ 0.05) across 5 repeated iterations. This then
demonstrates the proposed method’s ability at minimizing false negative rates
with a 17.8% reduction in relative error rates while not suﬀering during training
from class imbalance: with indistinguishable AUC metrics, we can conclude its
performance is not impacted by threshold choice (Fig. 3C).

    Recent studies, such as [17], have also compared SVM and CNN, showing the
better performance of the latter. The researchers obtained an accuracy of 0.92
and 0.75 when using 1D CNNs with and without data augmentation, respec-
tively. The results of the present study were obtained with data from a com-
parable cohort and, so far, without data augmentation in the workﬂow (to be
included in the next stages).
Raman Spectroscopy Classiﬁcation for Breast Cancer Conﬁrmation  25

    Furthermore, as the proposed method improves over both SVM-based
approaches—indeed no improvements were found when adding the AE com-
ponent to the SVM across all metrics—we thus obtain a model that removes the
need for expertly tuned features, streamlining the work of feature extraction, one
of the major beneﬁts of the DL approach. While not as relevant for use cases
with already known hand-crafted features (such as this present study), these
results stay nonetheless promising for generalizing to new and explored types of
cancer.

    When comparing the same proposed 1D CNN model trained on processed
vs raw RS signals (though not accounting for the larger number of input
features in the raw case), a signiﬁcant improvement was observed in accu-
racy (0.93 > 0.81, p < 0.05), sensitivity (0.94 > 0.80, p < 0.05) and speci-
ﬁcity (0.88 > 0.79, p < 0.05). This conﬁrms that RS optical signal process-
ing remains the gold standard for maximizing tissue discrimination results in
all approaches—signiﬁcant diﬀerence was found as well in AUC, accuracy and
speciﬁcity for SVM, and AUC and accuracy for AE+SVM.

    Interestingly, no diﬀerence in AUC, accuracy or sensitivity was found between
1D CNN and SVM which were both trained on raw inputs: we assume the noise
level (as a product of a naturally weak signal and a signiﬁcant background of
the tissue) inherent to unadulterated RS acquisitions poses an upper bound
in classiﬁcation performance. Indeed, while every raw input model presented
worse results in terms of accuracy, speciﬁcity and AUC when compared with the
baseline SVM on processed RS signals, no statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence was
found for sensitivity for our proposed method on raw signals and the (processed
RS) baseline in the metric with highest clinical relevance: a sensitivity of 0.80 <
0.89, p = 0.06 ≮ 0.05. The resulting lower 20% false negative rate allows the
critical improvements for margin conﬁrmation over the current 20–35% rate
during tumor removal surgery detected only postoperatively [12]. The fact that
this is achieved from raw RS without manual intervention shows the potential
to facilitate real-time analysis (once trained, the inference time range is 1.5 ms–
2.1 ms for a single spectrum).

    The major limitation of this study is the low number of patients and samples
(20 and 169, respectively). Current ongoing studies are actively testing alter-
native wide-ﬁeld RS systems to increase the number of samples and evaluating
the proposed model in larger available brain RS datasets. The proposed model
showed slight improvements over traditional SVMs, which could make it suit-
able for future integration into OR workﬂows, combined with recently developed
open-source tools [23] or DL strategies for standardized and eﬀective processing.

5 Conclusion

In this study, we proposed a DL pipeline based on shallow CNNs for breast
cancer detection using RS that allows real-time automated feature extraction
and classiﬁcation. Results show improvements in accuracy and sensitivity with
respect to conventional SVM-based approaches when analyzing processed RS
26  D. Grajales et al.

signals and on-par performance with raw data. The fundamental role of signal
processing in cancer detection was also conﬁrmed on ex-vivo data. While results
were shown to be similar to the state-of-the-art when using raw RS, there were
no signiﬁcant diﬀerences in false negative rates either, suggesting its potential as
an alternative for incorporating RS in clinical OR workﬂows. This research thus
allows to get closer to a real-time implementation and helps reduce the need for
follow-up interventions in breast-conserving surgery. Future work will evaluate
the robustness on diﬀerent tissue types and the role of data augmentation.

Acknowledgements. This research was undertaken thanks, in part, to funding from
the Canada First Research Excellence Fund through the TransMedTech Institute.

Disclosures. Fr´ed´eric Leblond is co-founder of ODS Medical (now Reveal Surgical)
formed in 2015 to commercialize a Raman spectroscopy system for neurosurgical and
prostate surgery applications. He has ownership and patents in the company.

Appendix

Figure 4 shows the results of the hyperparameter optimization. Except for the
learning rate, where a value of 0.001 presented better performance than the
alternatives, variations in the other parameters did not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the
classiﬁcation performance. Thus, for the proposed model (described in Sect. 3.3),
we selected those that presented a subtle advantage; in the case of the number
of epochs, the range of training time for 30 epochs was 91–102 s, while for 60
epochs, the range was 173–199 s, so the former was chosen.

Fig. 4. AUC (mean value in red) for the 1D-CNN model during the hyperparameter
optimization, testing diﬀerent epochs, learning rates, number of layers, and features.
Selected values are shown with an arrow. (Color ﬁgure online)

References

 1. Cordero, E., Latka, I., Matth¨aus, C., Schie, I., et al.: In-vivo Raman spectroscopy:
     from basics to applications. J. Biomed. Opt. 23(07), 1 (2018). https://doi.org/10.
     1117/1.jbo.23.7.071210

 2. Cui, S., Zhang, S., Yue, S.: Raman spectroscopy and imaging for cancer diagnosis.
     J. Healthcare Eng. 2018 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/8619342
Raman Spectroscopy Classiﬁcation for Breast Cancer Conﬁrmation  27

 3. Dallaire, F., et al.: Quantitative spectral quality assessment technique validated
     using intraoperative in vivo Raman spectroscopy measurements. J. Biomed. Opt.
     25(04), 1 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1117/1.jbo.25.4.040501

 4. David, S., et al.: In situ Raman spectroscopy and machine learning unveil biomolec-
     ular alterations in invasive breast cancer. J. Biomed. Opt. 29(03), 1–33 (2023)

 5. Desroches, J., Jermyn, M., Mok, K., Lemieux-Leduc, C., et al.: Characterization of
     a Raman spectroscopy probe system for intraoperative brain tissue classiﬁcation.
     Biomed. Opt. Express 6(7), 2380 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1364/boe.6.002380

 6. Desroches, J., et al.: Development and ﬁrst in-human use of a Raman spectroscopy
     guidance system integrated with a brain biopsy needle. J. Biophotonics 12(3), 1–7
     (2019). https://doi.org/10.1002/jbio.201800396

 7. Elumalai, S., Manag´o, S., De Luca, A.C.: Raman microscopy: progress in research
     on cancer cell sensing. Sensors (Switzerland) 20(19), 1–19 (2020). https://doi.org/
     10.3390/s20195525

 8. Gao, P., Han, B., Du, Y., Zhao, G., et al.: The clinical application of Raman
     spectroscopy for breast cancer detection. J. Spectrosc. 2017(1) (2017). https://
     doi.org/10.1155/2017/5383948

 9. Giaquinto, A.N., Sung, H., Miller, K.D., Kramer, J.L., et al.: Breast cancer statis-
     tics, 2022. CA Cancer J. Clin. 72(6), 524–541 (2022)

10. Grajales, D., et al.: Image-guided Raman spectroscopy navigation system to
     improve transperineal prostate cancer detection. Part 2: in-vivo tumor-targeting
     using a classiﬁcation model combining spectral and MRI-radiomics features. J.
     Biomed. Opt. 27(09), 1–16 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1117/1.jbo.27.9.095004

11. Haka, A.S., Shafer-Peltier, K.E., Fitzmaurice, M., Crowe, J., et al.: Diagnosing
     breast cancer by using Raman spectroscopy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102(35),
     12371–12376 (2005). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0501390102

12. Jacobs, L.: Positive margins: the challenge continues for breast surgeons. Ann.
     Surg. Oncol. 15(5), 1271–1272 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1245/s10434-007-9766-0

13. Kazemzadeh, M., Hisey, C.L., Martinez-calderon, M., Chamley, L.W., et al.: Deep
     learning as an improved method of preprocessing biomedical raman spectroscopy
     data, pp. 1–9 (2022). https://doi.org/10.36227/techrxiv.19435718.v1

14. Lazaro-Pacheco, D., Shaaban, A.M., Rehman, S., Rehman, I.: Raman spectroscopy
     of breast cancer. Appl. Spectrosc. Rev. 55(6), 439–475 (2020). https://doi.org/10.
     1080/05704928.2019.1601105

15. Lemoine, E´., Dallaire, F., Yadav, R., Agarwal, R., et al.: Feature engineering
     applied to intraoperative in vivo Raman spectroscopy sheds light on molecular
     processes in brain cancer: a. In: The Royal Society of Chemistry, pp. 6517–6532
     (2019). https://doi.org/10.1039/c9an01144g

16. Lopes, R.M., Silveira, L., Silva, M.A.R., Leite, K.R.M., et al.: Diagnostic model
     based on Raman spectra of normal, hyperplasia and prostate adenocarcinoma tis-
     sues in vitro. Spectroscopy 25(2), 89–102 (2011). https://doi.org/10.3233/SPE-
     2011-0494

17. Ma, D., Shang, L., Tang, J., Bao, Y., et al.: Classifying breast cancer tissue by
     Raman spectroscopy with one-dimensional convolutional neural network. Spec-
     trochimica Acta - Part A: Molec. Biomolec. Spectrosc. 256, 119732 (2021). https://
     doi.org/10.1016/j.saa.2021.119732

18. Pardo, A., Streeter, S.S., Maloney, B.W., et al.: Modeling and synthesis of breast
     cancer optical property signatures with generative models. IEEE Trans. Med. Imag-
     ing 40(6), 1687–1701 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1109/TMI.2021.3064464

19. Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., Lerer, A., et al.: PyTorch: an imperative style,
     high-performance deep learning library. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 32 (2019)
28  D. Grajales et al.

20. Petersen, D., Naveed, P., Ragheb, A., Niedieker, D., et al.: Raman ﬁber-optical
     method for colon cancer detection: cross-validation and outlier identiﬁcation app-
     roach. Spectrochimica Acta - Part A 181, 270–275 (2017). https://doi.org/10.
     1016/j.saa.2017.03.054

21. Plante, A., Dallaire, F., Grosset, A.A., Nguyen, T., Birlea, M., et al.: Dimensional
     reduction based on peak ﬁtting of Raman micro spectroscopy data improves detec-
     tion of prostate cancer in tissue specimens. J. Biomed. Opt. 26(11), 116501 (2021).
     https://doi.org/10.1117/1.jbo.26.11.116501

22. Santilli, A.M., Jamzad, A., Janssen, N.N., et al.: Perioperative margin detection
     in basal cell carcinoma using a deep learning framework. Int. J. Comput. Assist.
     Radiol. Surg. 15(5), 887–896 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11548-020-02152-9

23. Sheehy, G., Picot, F., Dallaire, F., Ember, K., Nguyen, T., Leblond, F.: Open-
     sourced Raman spectroscopy data processing package implementing a novel base-
     line removal algorithm validated from multiple datasets acquired in human tis-
     sue and bioﬂuids. J. Biomed. Opt. 28(February), 1–20 (2023). https://doi.org/10.
     1117/1.JBO.28.2.025002

24. St John, E.R., Balog, J., McKenzie, J.S., Rossi, M., et al.: Rapid evaporative
     ionisation mass spectrometry of electrosurgical vapours for the identiﬁcation of
     breast pathology: Towards an intelligent knife for breast cancer surgery. Breast
     Cancer Res. 19(1), 1–14 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13058-017-0845-2

25. Stomp-Agenant, M., van Dijk, T., R. Onur, A., Grimbergen, M., et al.: In vivo
     Raman spectroscopy for bladder cancer detection using a superﬁcial Raman probe
     compared to a nonsuperﬁcial Raman probe. J. Biophotonics 15(6), 1–9 (2022).
     https://doi.org/10.1002/jbio.202100354

26. Van Rossum, G., Drake, F.: Python 3 Reference Manual. CreateSpace, Scotts Val-
     ley (2009)

27. Zhang, L., Li, C., Peng, D., Yi, X., et al.: Raman spectroscopy and machine
     learning for the classiﬁcation of breast cancers. Spectrochimica Acta - Part A:
     Molec. Biomolec. Spectrosc. 264, 120300 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.saa.
     2021.120300

28. Zhou, M., Hu, Y., Wang, R., Guo, T., et al.: An end-to-end deep learning approach
     for Raman spectroscopy classiﬁcation. J. Chemom. 37, 1–16 (2022). https://doi.
     org/10.1002/cem.3464
      Fully Automated CAD System for Lung
     Cancer Detection and Classiﬁcation Using

        3D Residual U-Net with multi-Region
     Proposal Network (mRPN) in CT Images

      Anum Masood1,2(B) , Usman Naseem3 , and Mehwish Nasim4,5,6

 1 Department of Nuclear Medicine, RWTH University Hospital, Aachen, Germany
                       2 Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-2),
                            Forschungszentrum Ju¨lich, Ju¨lich, Germany
                                        a.masood@fz-juelich.de

 3 College of Science and Engineering, James Cook University, Townsville, Australia
                                        usman.naseem@jcu.edu.au

     4 College of Science and Engineering, Flinders University, Adelaide, Australia
                       5 School of Computer and Mathematical Sciences,
                             University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia
                      6 School of Physics, Mathematics, and Computing,
                      University of Western Australia, Adelaide, Australia
                                       mehwish.nasim@uwa.edu.au

         Abstract. Lung cancer is one of the leading causes of mortality world-
         wide. The survival rate of lung cancer depends on its timely detection
         and diagnosis. For pulmonary cancer detection, numerous Computer-
         Assisted Diagnosis (CADx) systems have been developed that use the CT
         scan imaging modality. Recent advancement in deep learning techniques
         has enabled these CADx to automatically model high-level abstractions
         in CT-Scan images using a multi-layered Convolutional Neural Network
         (CNN). Our proposed CAD system comprises 3D residual U-Net for nod-
         ule detection. Initially, the 3D residual U-Net resulted in false positive
         results; therefore, a multi-Region Proposal Network (mRPN) was pro-
         posed for the improvement of nodule detection. The detected nodules
         are assigned a probability of malignancy. Furthermore, each detected
         nodule is classiﬁed into four classes based on its respective malignancy
         score. Extensive experimental results illustrate the eﬀectiveness of our 3D
         residual U-Net model. These results demonstrate the exceptional detec-
         tion performance achieved by our proposed model with a sensitivity of
         97.65% and an average classiﬁcation accuracy of 96.37%. Performance
         analysis demonstrates the potential of the proposed CAD system for
         the detection and classiﬁcation of lung nodules with high eﬃciency and
         precision.

       Keywords: CT image · Lung cancer · CAD systems · Deep
       Learning · 3D U-Net

c The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
S. Ali et al. (Eds.): CaPTion 2023, LNCS 14295, pp. 29–39, 2023.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45350-2_3
30  A. Masood et al.

1 Introduction

Lung cancer has the highest mortality rate in both males and females where
the 3-year survival rate for patients with lung cancer is 25% [19]. There are
no obvious symptoms at the beginning of lung cancer, and as a consequence,
most patients seek treatment at the later stage, minimizing survival chances.
Therefore, early detection and diagnosis of lung cancer is of the utmost impor-
tance [1]. The chest computed tomography (CT) imaging modality provides
high-resolution images of nodules with lavish details; however, pulmonary nod-
ules have inhomogeneous densities and lower contrast compared to blood vessel
segments and other anatomical structures, increasing the complexity of nodule
detection [2,12]. To assist radiologists in automatically detecting nodules and
replacing the time-consuming manual delineation of nodules, Computer-Aided
Detection (CADe) and Diagnosis (CADx) systems are developed. The latest
technologies use Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) to assist in the auxiliary diagnosis
of the disease and improve the overall accuracy of the diagnosis while decreas-
ing the detection time [10]. In recent literature, researchers have presented deep
learning-based CAD systems with promising results. The convolutional neural
network (CNN) framework has been used for the classiﬁcation of nodules [7] and
the reduction of false positive (FP) [20]. Shen et al. proposed a Multi-Crop CNN
(MC-CNN) [18] and Setio et al. developed Multi-View CNN (MV-CNN) [16] to
classify lung nodule. A 3D-CNN model based on Volumes of Interest (VOI) and
a Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) was used to produce a score map for nod-
ule classiﬁcation [9]. Both CADe and CADx systems have been independently
investigated [6], CADe are unable to provide lesion’s radiological characteristics,
consequently missing crucial information, while CADx systems do not identify
lesions and therefore do not possess high levels of automation. Therefore, a new
and advanced CAD system is needed that incorporates the beneﬁts of detection
from CADe and diagnosis from CADx into a single system for better perfor-
mance.

1.1 Contribution

Our contribution is as follows:

– 3D Residual U-Net Model A novel nodule detection method is proposed
   using 3D CT images for candidate nodule detection; compared to existing
   2D U-Net models, our 3D residual model considers rich spatial features and
   therefore has more discriminative selection criteria.

– Multi-Region Proposal Network (mRPN) We added four RPNs so that
   nodules with varying diameters can be detected with ease and eﬃciency. The
   RPN split-and-merge cascade network mitigates the problem of undetected
   small nodules.

– Malignancy Score-Based Approach (MSBA) Malignancy score is calcu-
   lated to classify each detected nodule into one of the four classes based on its
   aggregate malignancy score.
Fully Automated CAD System for Lung Cancer Detection and Classiﬁcation                                                                              31

                                                                                                                   ConvoluƟonal Layers

                                                                                   Residual 64                128      256
                                                                                     U-Net                256      512

                                                                Input Patch

                                                          Overlapping Patches                                                 512
                                                                                                                            1024
                                                                                                   128

                                                     0.9        0.1
                                       0.7
                                                                                                                            Residual Blocks
                                       0.8  0.8                 0.5
                                                                                                                                              1024
                                Merge       0.3           0.5                                             2             512

Output Patch                                                                           64                    256                             512

                                                                                                          128      256

 Labeled                                                             Split
 Slice                                                                                               128
 Marked
 Location                                                            Multi-Region                         Transposed ConvoluƟonal Layers ( )

Malignancy Score

                                                          ,4,5       Proposal Network

Fig. 1. Overview of our CAD system comprising of 3D residual U-Net and multi-Region
Proposal Network for lung nodule detection and classiﬁcation.

– False-Positive Reduction Algorithm (FPRA) We proposed an algorithm
   for a false positive (FP) reduction rate. Comparative results are much better
   than the existing FP reduction algorithm. The performance of the proposed
   CAD system is evaluated with state-of-the-art CAD systems using various
   performance evaluation metrics. The experimental results showed that the
   proposed method can not only be used for detection but also performs well
   for the classiﬁcation of pulmonary cancer nodules as malignant and benign.

1.2 Paper Organization

Section 2 describes our approach, Sect. 3 discusses the implementation details,
Sect. 4 describes the experimental results, and Sect. 5 concludes this paper.

2 Our Approach

We improved three aspects of the lung cancer detection models. First, the
datasets used by most authors do not consider the lung wall. We considered
location as one of the most important features and therefore found that most
nodules occur in close proximity to the lung wall. Therefore, our model avoided
omitting the edge of the lung. Secondly, we used 3d U-Net to ﬁlter candidate
nodules [22]. Finally, we applied CNNs for nodule classiﬁcation.

2.1 Pre-processing

Our in-house dataset comprises 56 patients’ CT scans using a GE CT scan-
ner (with contrast and 3mm slice thickness) in DICOM format. Each CT scan
32  A. Masood et al.

is composed of 80 to 200 distinct slices and the primary tumor was manu-
ally delineated using 3D-Slicer software. We resized each CT-scan data using
average upsampling and average downsampling with bilinear interpolation by
ImageJ software. Furthermore, we scaled the pixel value using the min-max
scalar method and applied the CLAHE (Contrast Limited Adaptive Histogram
Equalization) method. Data augmentation is necessary because deep learning-
based models require large training datasets. The positive dataset to train our
proposed model was insuﬃcient, leading to the overﬁtting problem. We increased
the positive dataset sample by using 128 × 128 × 128 window size. We used aﬃne
transformations (rotation [0◦ to 270◦ around the center point], ﬂipping, transla-
tion, and scaling) along with image enhancement by Gaussian High Pass ﬁlter
with kernel size 3 × 3 to improve image quality and sharpening ﬁlter. For each
image Pn(z) shown in Eq. (1), and S in Eq. (2) where rt, zt is the reset and
update to apply the aﬃne transformations, respectively. While hˆt is the ﬁnal
augmented state of the data. The aﬃne transformations were standardized so
that the average samples have variance=1 and mean=0.

                      Pn (z)  =   1    e− (z − μ)2    (1)
                                 √     2σ2
                                 σ 2π

                      S[rt, zt] = Σkn=−rW(b, W + hr)  (2)

2.2 RPN Split-Merge Cascade Network

For the detection of various nodules having diﬀerent diameters, we used varying
levels of RP NLx referring to diﬀerent sizes of the nodule. We set the RP NL1
as small anchors to detect the diameter of the nodule τ that ranges from 3 mm
to 10 mm and has a volume υ <= 80 mm3 while RP NL2, RP NL3 and RP NL4
have large anchors to detect nodules ranging from τ = 10 mm–20 mm or υ = 80–
200 mm3, τ = 20 mm–30 mm or υ >= 200–300 mm3 and τ >= 30 mm or υ >
300 mm3, respectively. The motivation behind these RPNs is the four stages
of lung cancer that are categorized by diﬀerent diameters, while RP NL1 is for
all the input nodules. The RPN split and merge cascade network starts with
the RP NL1 which is further split to either RP NL2 or the rest and then in the
next step it is input for the RP NL3 or RP NL4. Since each RPN level generates
separate RoI sets, a merging layer is required that combines the RoI sets into
one, the RPN levels merge layer RP Nm takes the input RoI sets from all the
RPN levels (RP NL1, RP NL2, RP NL3, RP NL4) and outputs an aggregate RoI
set RoIagg. For the possibility of duplicate RoI or low objectiveness score RoI, we
used the non-maxima suppression (Non-MS) when the intersection over union
(IoU) overlap is above the threshold (threshold set at ρt = 0.5). After using
the Non-MS, we selected the top hundred RoI with low objectiveness scores
for further use. Nodule detection using diﬀerent levels of RPN having various
anchors improves the detection phase, as both diameter and volume are taken
into consideration.
Fully Automated CAD System for Lung Cancer Detection and Classiﬁcation  33

2.3 3D Residual U-Net Training Strategy and Architecture

Our proposed model relies heavily on exploiting the symmetries of the 3D space

[16]. Therefore, the lung CT scan is converted into 3D fragments which are used

as input for the 3D residual net. For 3D CT images containing lung nodules,

the lung nodule regions were cropped to a size of 128 × 128 × 64. The 3D resid-

ual net detects the module malignancy based on the characteristics obtained

from the input image, and the probability of cancer stage is estimated [5]. We

used binary valued threshold (corrosion & expansion) and Laplacian of Gaus-

sian to segment the lung nodules (including lung wall), morphologic closing was

performed and connected component operations are labeled in order to remove

background and noise. A hole-ﬁlling algorithm based on contour information

was also used to reserve the nodules on the lung wall. We obtained a collection

of the interval [xk, yk] that contains all the intervals of Cn. M, so if n is large
n                                  n

enough, |yk − xk| < η. But |fc(yk) − fc(xk)| = 1. The segmentation issue

k=1                             k=1

is addressed by taking N partitions of the set of features represented by P of

classes M , thus minimizing the cost term of the error function by assigning the

pixel P in Eq. (3) and Eq. (4)

                                N

     min                              yi − Pxi  2  s.t. ∀i xi 0         (3)
                                                2
     M,x
          i=1

                 1                    N            M    Rknl  Vk2l      (4)
          E=                          k=1          l=1

                 2

Another challenge for our proposed model was learning the complex inner

spatial relationship between parameters using deeper CNN. We added multiple

residual blocks in the middle of the 3D U-Net model, which is capable of produc-

ing higher-level packet information. Taking into account the complex anatomical

structures surrounding the lung lesion, we needed an eﬀective method to use con-

textual information at multiple levels [15]. An overview of the CAD system for

the detection of lung nodules using the 3D residual U-Net and multi-Region

Proposal Network (mRPN) is shown in Fig. 1.

2.4 Malignancy Score-Based Approach (MSBA)

For the classiﬁcation of detected lung lesions in the nodule detection phase, the
Malignancy Score-Based Approach (MSBA) is used to achieve the assessment of
nodule malignancy of candidate lesions. For this phase, the regions of interest
(RoIs) that are marked by the nodule detection phase are redeﬁned from each
marked location resulting from the last step. MSBA assigns the malignancy score
to RoIs by considering the metastasis information provided in the data set to
classify the candidate nodule into T 0, T 1, T 2, and T 3 stages. The details of
MSBA are provided in Algorithm 1. The neighboring pixels in 3D surrounding
the RoIs are taken into consideration in terms of intensity values and their
eigenvalues (Hessian Matrix and the Gradient Matrix) to assign an aggregate
score to each candidate-marked lesion. The result of this step is the allocation
of the average score to all candidate nodules.
34   A. Masood et al.

Algorithm 1. Malignancy Score-Based Approach

Require: n + 1 candidate nodules (x0, f (x0)), (x1, f (x1)), . . ., (xn, f (xn))
Ensure: Probability of the nodule to be pulmonary cancer nodule P n(x)

1: Si,j ← 0, 0 ≤ i, j ≤ n;

2: Si,j = f [xi−j , xi−j+1, . . . , xi];
3: for i ← 0 to n do

4: Si,0 ← f (xi);

5: Thus, f (x) is obtained by taking the singular value decomposition;

6: end for

7: for i ← 1 to n do

8: for j ← 1 to i do

9:   Si,j    ←  Si,j −1 −Si−1,j −1  ;
                        xi −xi−j

10:  Sum of all the prediction values is done taking candidate nodule probability;

11: end for

12: end for
13: P n(x) ← f (x0);
14: Rn(x) ← 1;

15: for i ← 1 to n do
16: Rn(x) ← Rn(x) · (x − xi−1);
17: P n(x) ← P n(x) + Si,i · Rn(x);

18: end for

Table 1. Confusion matrix of lung cancer classiﬁcation Using 3D Residual U-Net

     Stage T0                             T1  T2                        T3

     T0 96.24% (652) 3.32% (24)               5.84% (42)                5.96% (45)

     T1 5.94% (29)                        92.42% (741) 3.76% (28)       6.64% (61)

     T2 10.51% (93) 7.30% (84)                91.35% (722) 3.16% (22)

     T3 4.45% (18)                        13.18% (102) 6.14% (54)       89.10% (709)

3 Implementation

In addition to our in-house lung cancer CT dataset, we used publicly avail-
able datasets namely the LIDC-IDRI [4], ANODE09 [8], and LUNA16 [17] for
evaluation. The probability of nodules is calculated for the nodule candidates
generated by the classiﬁcation model. On the basis of this probability, we mark
the nodules as benign and malignant in Fig. 2. To reduce false positive results,
we have proposed an algorithm that considers the probability of the candidate
nodule and further improves the classiﬁcation of the nodules into diﬀerent stages
while omitting false positive results at each stage. The details of our proposed
algorithm for false positive reduction are provided in Algorithm 2.

4 Experimental Results

Our results are obtained using the concept that if a detected nodule is very close
to the annotated nodule, we gain a score and the score is related to the FROC
curve on sensitivity at 1/8, 1/4, 1/2, 1, 2, 4, and 8 [21]. We obtained a score of
0.974 (MAX = 1) by randomly selecting data records as the test set (excluding
training and validation dataset), and an accuracy of approximately 0.997 was
Fully Automated CAD System for Lung Cancer Detection and Classiﬁcation  35

Fig. 2. Qualitative results of our proposed model on in-house dataset showing accu-
rately detected benign nodules (T0) in (a),(b),(c); benign nodules (T1) in (d),(e),(f);
malignant nodules (T2) in (g),(h),(i), malignant nodules (T3) in (j), (k) (l) and accu-
rately detected negative nodules in (m),(n) and (o).

recorded. The results are validated using the common performance metric of
computer-aided detection and diagnosis systems, i.e., average accuracy, speci-
ﬁcity, and sensitivity. For a detailed performance analysis of our CAD system,
we applied the ROC curve, which presents the TPR (True Positive Rate) as the
FPR function (False Positive Rate). We plotted the sensitivity (TPR) with their
respective FPR to compare our CAD system with state-of-the-art CAD systems.

    The eﬀectiveness of our method 3D Residual U-Net is veriﬁed by comparing
it with Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), Massive training artiﬁcial neural
networks (MTANNs), Fully Convolutional Networks (FCN), Region-based Fully
Convolutional Networks (RFCN), and RNN (Recurrent Neural Networks), the
performance results are depicted in Fig. 3. Table 2 summarizes the performance
of our proposed CAD system in comparison to other CAD systems in terms
of accuracy, sensitivity, speciﬁcity, False Positive (FP), and average FP (using
FPRA). It is visible from the confusion matrix in Table 1 that the proposed
model maintains a high sensitivity for the classiﬁcation of types of lung cancer
even in the region where FP per scan is low. Although the proposed model
achieved a high sensitivity value for stage classiﬁcation for T0, T2, and T3, the
sensitivity value of T1 decreases as the FP per scan becomes small, which is
36      A. Masood et al.

Algorithm 2. False-Positive Reduction Algorithm

Require: Candidate nodule V-RoI VR, sphericity s, ellipticity e, volume v, entropy S, maximum

     convergence Cmax, intensity SD σI , maximum radii Rmax, neighbors’ intensity In
Ensure: Elimination of FPs from the candidate nodules yielding the nodules N p(x)

1: Ii,j ← 0, 0 ≤ i, j ≤ n;

2: Ai,j = f [xi−j , xi−j+1];

3: Initial Elimination Phase:

4: First round of Elimination of FPs from candidate nodules non-spherical and having numerous

     voxels;

5: for i ← 0 to n do

6: VRi, 0 ← fini(xi)=s+In+v;

7: fini(x) is obtained by sum of the sphericity, neighbors’ intensity and volume;

8: If fini(xi) for any V-RoI VRi, 0 is less than the threshold Tini, V-RoI is eliminated;

9: end for

10: Advance Elimination Phase:

11: for i ← 1 to n do

12: for j ← 1 to i do

13:     VRi, j ← fad(xi)=v+s+e+S+Cmax+σI +Rmax+In;

14:     Eigenvalues Hessian matrix Hi(x) and Gradient matrix Gi(x);

15:     If fad(xi) for any V-RoI VRi, j is less than threshold Tad, V-RoI is eliminated;

16:     Features sum fad(x) is done taking candidate nodule features into consideration for the

        classiﬁcation phase;

17: end for

18: end for

19: Classiﬁcation Phase:
20: N p(x) ← fcl(x0);
21: for i ← 1 to n do
22: N p(x) ← N p(i)+fad(xi). Hn(x) + Gi(x);

23: end for

     Table 2. Performance comparison of our proposed model with state-of-the-art

Method        Accuracy Sensitivity Speciﬁcity FP per scan Avg FP (using FPRA)

CNN [23]      0.797 0.753       0.865        0.070                   0.065

TumorNet [11] 0.811 0.815       0.899        0.090                   0.083

FCNN [3]      0.843 0.837       0.967 0.110                          0.071

DFCNet [13] 0.967 0.821         0.954        0.040                   0.029

mRFCN [14] 0.913 0.731          0.864        0.063                   0.034

Ours          0.997 0.976       0.942        0.045                   0.026

impractical in the clinical environment [14]. A summary of our proposed CAD
system in terms of stage classiﬁcation is shown in Table 1. The experimental
results demonstrate the superiority in the classiﬁcation and class generalization
of our proposed 3D Residual U-Net based CAD system. A comparison of nodule
classiﬁcation by CAD systems is shown in Fig. 4.

    A comparison of our model with the existing state-of-the-art CADe systems
on the LIDC-IDRI dataset with varying nodule sizes is shown in Table 3. We
have compared the detection accuracy of our CADe system with the detection
accuracy of ﬁve other existing systems, which are evaluated on the dataset from
the LIDC-IDRI database. The high accuracy of our proposed model with varying
sizes signiﬁes the detection capability of our 3D Residual U-Net model. Our
method has promising results in discriminating cancer nodule types without
compromising detection accuracy (Fig. 4).
Fully Automated CAD System for Lung Cancer Detection and Classiﬁcation  37

Fig. 3. The plot illustrating the sensitivity of the 3D residual model on the Luna16
dataset with the state-of-the-art CAD systems. The x-axis denotes the average number
of FP per scan while the y-axis represents the sensitivity.

Fig. 4. Comparison of our 3D residual U-Net CAD system nodule classiﬁcation with
state-of-the-art CADe systems.
38     A. Masood et al.

Table 3. Comparison of our proposed model on nodule classiﬁcation with the state-
of-the-art CADe systems using CT dataset (subset of inhouse data, LIDC-IDRI [4],
ANODE09 [8], LUNA16)

Model                    <= 3 mm 5 mm 10 mm 20 mm 30 mm >30 mm Avg ACC*

CNN [20]                 0.67  0.78 0.86 0.91 0.88 0.85 0.83

FCNN and SVM [7]         0.75  0.79 0.77 0.91 0.92 0.93 0.73

Multi-Crop CNN [18] 0.68       0.81 0.90 0.89 0.87 0.91 0.85

Multi-View CNN [16] 0.67       0.81 0.86 0.90 0.91 0.87 0.84

VOI Based 3D-FCN [9] 0.90      0.88 0.93 0.94 0.87 0.96 0.91

Ours(3D Residual U-Net) 0.94   0.96 0.96 0.97 0.98 0.98                            0.96

* Avg ACC means Average Accuracy; Row 2 to Row 7 represent different nodule sizes

5 Conclusion

We proposed a novel CAD system for the automatic detection and classiﬁcation
of lung nodules in CT images. Our CAD system comprises two models, the
3D residual U-Net and multi-Region Proposal Network (mRPN), which have
demonstrated eﬀective nodule detection results even with small-sized lesions. For
the classiﬁcation of nodules, the aggregate malignancy score is calculated for each
detected nodule. Based on this score, detected nodules are classiﬁed into four
classes; T 0, T 1, T 2, and T 3. Experimental results illustrate the eﬃcacy of our
proposed CAD system in comparison to state-of-the-art CAD systems that use
various performance evaluation metrics. Our proposed CAD system is generic
and therefore could possibly be extended to the detection of other cancers.

References

 1. Adams, S.J., Stone, E., Baldwin, D.R., Vliegenthart, R., Lee, P., Fintelmann, F.J.:
     Lung cancer screening. Lancet 401(10374), 390–408 (2023)

 2. Alahmari, S.S., Cherezov, D., Goldgof, D.B., Hall, L.O., Gillies, R.J., Schabath,
     M.B.: Delta radiomics improves pulmonary nodule malignancy prediction in lung
     cancer screening. IEEE Access 6, 77796–77806 (2018)

 3. Alves, J.H., Neto, P.M.M., Oliveira, L.F.: Extracting lungs from ct images using
     fully convolutional networks. In: 2018 International Joint Conference on Neural
     Networks (IJCNN), pp. 1–8. IEEE (2018)

 4. Armato, S.G., III.: The lung image database consortium (LIDC) and image
     database resource initiative (IDRI): a completed reference database of lung nodules
     on CT scans. Med. Phys. 38(2), 915–931 (2011)

 5. Dou, Q., Chen, H., Yu, L., Qin, J., Heng, P.A.: Multilevel contextual 3-D CNNs
     for false positive reduction in pulmonary nodule detection. IEEE Trans. Biomed.
     Eng. 64(7), 1558–1567 (2017)

 6. Firmino, M., Angelo, G., Morais, H., Dantas, M.R., Valentim, R.: Computer-aided
     detection (CADe) and diagnosis (CADx) system for lung cancer with likelihood of
     malignancy. BioMed. Eng. OnLine 15(1), 2:1–2:17 (2016)
Fully Automated CAD System for Lung Cancer Detection and Classiﬁcation  39

 7. van Ginneken, B., Setio, A.A.A., Jacobs, C., Ciompi, F.: Oﬀ-the-shelf convolutional
     neural network features for pulmonary nodule detection in computed tomography
     scans. In: IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging, pp. 286–289
     (2015)

 8. van Ginneken, B., et al.: Comparing and combining algorithms for computer-aided
     detection of pulmonary nodules in computed tomography scans: the ANODE09
     study. Med. Image Anal. 14(6), 707–722 (2010)

 9. Hamidian, S., Sahiner, B., Petrick, N., Pezeshk, A.: 3D convolutional neural net-
     work for automatic detection of lung nodules in chest CT. In: Proceedings of SPIE,
     vol. 10134 (2017)

10. Huang, S., Yang, J., Shen, N., Xu, Q., Zhao, Q.: Artiﬁcial intelligence in lung cancer
     diagnosis and prognosis: current application and future perspective. In: Seminars
     in Cancer Biology. Elsevier (2023)

11. Hussein, S., Gillies, R., Cao, K., Song, Q., Bagci, U.: TumorNet: lung nodule char-
     acterization using multi-view convolutional neural network with Gaussian process.
     In: IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging, pp. 1007–1010 (2017)

12. Li, X., Deng, Z., Deng, Q., Zhang, L., Niu, T., Kuang, Y.: A novel deep learning
     framework for internal gross target volume deﬁnition from 4d computed tomogra-
     phy of lung cancer patients. IEEE Access 6, 37775–37783 (2018)

13. Masood, A., et al.: Computer-assisted decision support system in pulmonary cancer
     detection and stage classiﬁcation on CT images. J. Biomed. Inf. 79, 117–128 (2018)

14. Masood, A., et al.: Automated decision support system for lung cancer detection
     and classiﬁcation via enhanced rfcn with multilayer fusion rpn. IEEE Trans. Ind.
     Inf. 16(12), 7791–7801 (2020)

15. Masood, A., et al.: Cloud-based automated clinical decision support system for
     detection and diagnosis of lung cancer in chest CT. IEEE J. Transl. Eng. Health
     Med. 8, 1–13 (2019)

16. Setio, A.A.A., et al.: Pulmonary nodule detection in CT images: false positive
     reduction using multi-view convolutional networks. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging
     35(5), 1160–1169 (2016)

17. Setio, A.A.A., et al.: Validation, comparison, and combination of algorithms for
     automatic detection of pulmonary nodules in computed tomography images: The
     LUNA16 challenge. Med. Image Anal. 42, 1–13 (2017)

18. Shen, W., et al.: Multi-crop convolutional neural networks for lung nodule malig-
     nancy suspiciousness classiﬁcation. Pattern Recogn. 61, 663–673 (2017)

19. Siegel, R.L., Miller, K.D., Wagle, N.S., Jemal, A.: Cancer statistics, 2023. Ca Canc.
     J. Clin. 73(1), 17–48 (2023)

20. Tan, M., Deklerck, R., Jansen, B., Bister, M., Cornelis, J.: A novel computer-aided
     lung nodule detection system for CT images. Med. Phys. 38(10), 5630–5645 (2011)

21. Teramoto, A., Fujita, H.: Fast lung nodule detection in chest CT images using
     cylindrical nodule-enhancement ﬁlter. Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg. 8(2),
     193–205 (2013)

22. Xie, Y., Zhang, J., Xia, Y., Fulham, M., Zhang, Y.: Fusing texture, shape and
     deep model-learned information at decision level for automated classiﬁcation of
     lung nodules on chest CT. Inf. Fusion 42, 102–110 (2018)

23. Yuan, J., Liu, X., Hou, F., Qin, H., Hao, A.: Hybrid-feature-guided lung nodule
     type classiﬁcation on CT images. Comput. Graph. 70, 288–299 (2018)
     Image Captioning for Automated Grading
      and Understanding of Ulcerative Colitis

            Flor Helena Valencia1, Daniel Flores-Araiza1, Obed Cerda2,
   Venkataraman Subramanian3, Thomas de Lange4, Gilberto Ochoa-Ruiz1,

                                       and Sharib Ali5(B)

1 School of Engineering and Sciences, Tecnologico de Monterrey, Monterrey, Mexico
                    2 CINVESTAV Unidad Guadalajara, Zapopan, Mexico
                       3 Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds, UK
                    4 Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden
                    5 School of Computing, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK
                                           s.s.ali@leeds.ac.uk

         Abstract. Ulcerative colitis (UC) is a chronic inﬂammatory disease of
         the large bowel characterised by quisent periodes and relapses. Endo-
         scopic grading of the severity of UC is done by using a widely accepted
         scoring system known as the “Mayo Endoscopic Scoring” (MES). The
         MES score is largely based on the recognition of phenotypic features of
         the mucosal wall, and thus the subjectivity in clinical scoring is unavoid-
         able. An automated grading and characterisation can certainly help to
         minimise the inter-observer variability and help trainees to get useful
         insights. For the ﬁrst time, we a system capable of not only providing
         an automated MES scoring system, but also of generating a descrip-
         tion of visible MES phenotypic mucosal representations in these endo-
         scopic images through captions. Our aim is to combine the visual fea-
         tures together with word sequence embeddings that are learnt jointly
         through a recurrent neural network to predict such scene descriptions.
         In this work, we explore various recurrent neural network architectures
         together with other backbone architectures for visual feature representa-
         tions. Our experiments on held-out test samples demonstrate high simi-
         larity between the reference and the predicted captions.

       Keywords: Colonoscopy · Ulcerative colitis · Image captioning ·
       Classiﬁcation · Deep learning

1 Introduction

Inﬂammatory bowel diseases (IBD), including Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcer-
ative colitis (UC), and characterised by a chronic inﬂammation aﬀecting the
gastrointestinal tract. As per recent estimates, the annual incidence of UC in
Europe is approximately 24.3 cases per 100,000 populations per year, and in
terms of prevalence it is about 322 cases per 100,000 population per year [9].
However, these numbers are projected to rise as speciﬁc geographical patterns

c The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
S. Ali et al. (Eds.): CaPTion 2023, LNCS 14295, pp. 40–51, 2023.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45350-2_4
Image Captioning for Understanding Ulcerative Colitis  41

have indicated an increasing incidence of UC in countries such as Asia and North
Africa [14]. Since UC is a lifelong illness, patients with this condition often expe-
rience relapses and remissions which lead to signiﬁcant impact on their quality
of life [4]. Additionally, due to the persistent nature of UC, patients have six
times increased risk of colorectal cancer (CRC). Several studies indicate that
the colonoscopy surveillance plays a crucial role in mitigating the development
to colorectal cancer (CRC) [10]. Therefore, an early and accurate diagnosis is
critical to enhance the patient’s chances of long term disease remission, as treat-
ment approaches and subsequent monitoring vary depending on the severity of
the disease.

    Colonoscopy is considered as the gold standard diagnostic procedure for UC
as it enables an accurate assessment of the extent and severity of the disease.
Several evaluation methods exist, with the Mayo Endoscopic Score (MES) being
the most extensively used [5,11]. The MES system takes into account several
features including loss of vascular pattern, erythema, friability, granularity, ero-
sions, mucosal bleeding, and ulcerations [11,16]. Here, friability is an important
characteristics that can only can be assessed during endoscopy. Based on these
criteria, UC is classiﬁed into four severity scores, ranging from 0 to 3, with MES
0 indicating inactive disease with normal mucosa, MES 1 mild disease, MES 2
moderate disease, and MES 3 severe disease. However, the grading of UC in
endoscopy relies mainly on the level of expertise and ability of health profession-
als. Similarly, UC grading can be very challenging as several images can have
bleeding cause by biopsy and not be due the inﬂammation. Thus, it is often dif-
ﬁcult to assess vascular pattern on one simple image because there is a variation
between individuals and regions of the colon. Several studies have highlighted
substantial inter- and intra-observer variability in the diagnosis and scoring of
UC due to the subjectivity of qualitative image interpretation in endoscopy
[15, 17].

    The importance of developing AI tools for automated classiﬁcation of UC has
increased over recent years in an attempt to improve diagnostic accuracy and
reduce subjectivity. Most of these studies have employed deep learning models
for developing computer-assisted diagnosis (CAD) for classifying inﬂammation
severity according to MES [6,12,13,19]. A recent survey paper that highlighted
current works on applying deep learning (DL) for UC classiﬁcation suggested
that UC is highly complex, with highly subtle changes between mild to severe
types makes DL method struggle in accurately classifying [1]. Using multi-modal
data (e.g., both images and text embedding) can help learn clear representations
compared to a single modality (e.g., only images). Moreover one of the limitations
of utilising DL algorithms for diagnostic tasks is the inherent black box nature
of these methods, as they fail to explain the machine-generated decisions on
complex ﬁndings such as UC grading, hindering clinical adoption.

    In this paper we propose a proof-of-concept approach for image captioning
to develop trustworthy and reliable automated scoring system for UC (Fig. 1).
Our approach aims to provide comprehensive description of UC manifestations in
endoscopic images. Our approach employs an Encoder-Decoder architecture. For
42  F. H. Valencia et al.

    Normal vascular        There is patchy
    pattern along with     obliteration of the
    normal mucosa, no      vascular pattern, the
    visible erosions, or   mucosa
    bleeding were          demonstrates
    observed these         superficial ulcers,
    findings indicate a    moderate friability,
    MES0.                  marked erythema,
                           mucosal bleeding is
    A diagnosis of         present these
    MES1 is supported      findings support a
    by observations of     MES2. .
    patchy obliteration
    of the vascular        Characterized by
    pattern along with     marked erythema,
    moderate erythema,     deep ulcers, severe
    low friability,        friability, the mucosa
    erosions, and          shows luminal mild
    mucosal bleeding.      bleeding, there is
                           complete
                           obliteration of the
                           vascular pattern
                           observed this
                           evidence suggest a
                           MES3.

Fig. 1. Sample images with caption. Mayo Endoscopic Scoring with description as
caption for each categories for grading patients with ulcerative colitis in inﬂammatory
bowel disease.

the encoder we test a range of distinct backbone architectures, each optimised
for feature extraction. For the decoder, we make use of several recurrent units
including Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU), and
basic Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN). The purpose of our approach is to gen-
erate accurate captions based on several endoscopic features, thereby facilitating
the evaluation of disease severity based on the MES system, while tackling the
prevailing issue of interpretability associated with machine-generated decisions.

    The rest of this paper is organised as follows. In Sect. 2 we discuss recent
relevant research on UC scoring and automated medical report generation using
DL. Section 3 outlines the proposed method, while Sect. 4 covers implementation
details, dataset preparation, and results. Finally, discussion and conclusion are
presented in Sect. 5.

2 Related Work

2.1 Deep-Learning Based UC Scoring

In UC grading, several studies have developed deep-learning based classiﬁca-
tions models for assessing colonoscopic inﬂammations. Sutton et al. [13] used a
DenseNet121 achieving an accuracy of 87.5% and an AUC of 0.90 on the Hyper-
Kvasir dataset. While Ozawa et al. [8] developed a GoogLeNet-based computer-
aided diagnosis system trained using 26,304 colonoscopy images from a total of
841 patients, obtaining an AUROC of 0.98 for Mayo 0–1 versus 2–3 inﬂamma-
tions. However, these two studies were limited to a binary classiﬁcation approach.
Image Captioning for Understanding Ulcerative Colitis  43

In contrast, Bhambhvani and Zamora [2] developed a model capable of individ-
ual MES discrimination (1,2 and 3) using ResNeXt-101. Their proposed model
achieved AUC values of 0.96, 0.89, and 0.86 for MES 3, 2, and 1 respectively,
and an overall accuracy of 77.2%. Following this similar approach, Xu et al. [18]
proposed a 3-way MES classiﬁcation model based on the EﬃcientNet-b5 archi-
tecture using HyperKvasir dataset. The model incorporated ArcFace loss, an
additive angular margin penalty based on softmax, and achieved top-1 accu-
racy of 75.06%, top-2 accuracy of 93.68%, and an F1 score of 76.15%. All of
these methods are only classiﬁcation methods and do not use image captioning
strategy to describe the endoscopic ﬁndings.

2.2 Automated Medical Report Generation

So far, a limited number of studies have been conducted related to image caption-
ing in the context of endoscopic diagnosis. Fonolla` et al. [6] developed a CADx
system to automatically generate colorectal polyp (CRP) reports based on Blue
light imaging Adenoma Serrated International Classiﬁcation (BASIC) using four
descriptors. The study model consists of an EﬃcientNetB4 based encoder and
feature extractor, with the classiﬁcation layers replaced by a global average pool-
ing layer. The authors employed a pre-trained BERT module for learning polyp
sequences. The visual and text information were later concatenated and passed
through an LSTM to capture word temporal relations. Evaluated using n-gram
based metrics like BLEU and ROUGE, and METEOR scores were used with the
model providing BLUE-1 of 0.67, ROUGE-L of 0.83, and METEOR of 0.50. To
the best of our knowledge, no documented research has focused on automating
the report generation for ulcerative colitis.

3 Method

Our proposed method integrates the Encoder-Decoder framework (Fig. 2). We
adopted diﬀerent backbones for encoding and recurrent units for decoding in
this architecture including DenseNet121, ResNet50, and Res2Net50 as encoders,
each pre-trained on ImageNet. For the decoding part, we experimented with
LSTM, GRU, and RNN and also with one or two layers.

    As shown in Fig. 2, the high-level feature vectors obtained from the encoder
are concatenated with the embeddings of reference captions, produced through
an embedding layer, and then fed into the selected recurrent unit. To prevent
overﬁtting and to promote model robustness, we implemented a dropout layer
before the ﬁnal fully-connected layer. This layer maps the outputs to the size of
the vocabulary, and the resulting label indexes are subsequently converted into
corresponding words, forming the predicted captions.

3.1 Feature Extraction

The initial stage of our medical image captioning model involves feature extrac-
tion. For this task, we experimented with three distinct ImageNet pre-trained
44  F. H. Valencia et al.

                                                                                      Predicted   there is patchy <EOS>
                                                                                         caption
                                                                                                  p1 p2 p3

                                                                                                          ...

                                         Encoder

Reference UC caption                     Feature maps                    Concatenate                     FC
                                                                                                       Dropout
 there is patchy obliteration of the                       Tokenised                                   (p = 0.1)
 vascular pattern the mucosa                       word representations
 demonstrates moderate erythema                                                                   Recurrent unit/s
 low friability and no visible erosions          Embedding                                            Decoder
 no visible bleeding is present these                 layer
 findings support a MES1                                                              . . . <start> there
                                                                                                           <EOS>

Fig. 2. UC image captioning block diagram. Feature map predictions from an
ImageNet pre-trained encoder network are used and concatenated with the embeddings
of the reference UC captions. Embeddings are then passed to recurrent unit (either
single or two in our experiments). Finally, a dropout and fully connected layer is used
for predicting label indexes that are converted to the corresponding words representing
predicted caption.

Table 1. Experimental results on validation set for classiﬁcation of MES (0, 1, 2 and
3). Best results is presented in bold.

    Backbone Metrics
                       Accuracy F1-score PPV Recall

    DenseNet121 75.75% 74.70% 76.33% 75.75%
    ResNet50 75.75% 74.16% 76.74% 75.75%
    Res2Net50 78.78% 78.32% 78.08% 78.78%

backbones: DenseNet121, ResNet50, and Res2Net50. We ﬁrst trained these archi-
tectures to classify images based the MES into four classes: MES-0, MES-1,
MES-2, and MES-3. Table 1 presents the classiﬁcation accuracies correspond-
ing to each of the selected backbones in our experimental evaluation. Once
trained, the learned weights from this classiﬁcation task were retained. Dur-
ing the encoder phase of our captioning model, images are processed by one
of these pre-trained backbones, each serving as a feature extractor. This was
accomplished by removing the ﬁnal layer of the architecture and utilizing the
weights from the MES classiﬁcation training to ensure the extracted features
were relevant and ﬁne-tuned to our medical dataset.

    The backbone transforms the input image into a set of high-level features,
which are output of the encoder phase. To ensure stable learning, we apply batch
Image Captioning for Understanding Ulcerative Colitis  45

normalization to prevent shifts in feature value distributions during training,
thus promoting consistent learning progress and predictable model performance.

3.2 Sequence Processing and Decoding

For the sequential data pre-processing, the input captions were tokenized and
transformed into a dense vector representation via word embedding layer. This
representation reduces the input data dimensionality and captures semantic rela-
tionships between words. Within each processing batch, a reference caption was
randomly selected from the set to ensure variation and enrich the training pro-
cess. During this process, special tokens are introduced to handle speciﬁc sce-
narios, which will be described as follows.

    First of all, the <SOS> (Start Of Sentence) token is used to mark the begin-
ning of each caption, whereas the <EOS> (End Of Sentence) token signiﬁes the
conclusion of each caption. Additionally, in order to ensure consistency in the
input size of the recurrent units, all captions were padded with the special token
(<PAD>) in order to reach the maximum sequence length, which in this case is
set to 33 words.

    The resultant embeddings are subsequently concatenated with the visual fea-
ture vectors thus integrating the multi-modal information. This process produces
a comprehensive representation that captures both visual features and the cor-
responding text annotations. The combined tensor is subsequently fed to the
chosen recurrent unit. The ﬁnal fully connected layer modiﬁes the recurrent unit
output to it align with the dimension of the target vocabulary. A linear trans-
formation is used to generate the next word in the sequence by identifying the
word with the highest score.

    To generate captions for input images during inference, we use a greedy
decoding approach. The process is initiated with the special token <SOS>. At
each time step, the model generates a probability distribution over the target
vocabulary for the next word, based on the current state and input. The word
with the highest probability is selected as the next word in the sequence. This
sequence of operations continues until the special token <EOS> token is pre-
dicted.

4 Experiments and Results

4.1 Implementation Details

Dataset The dataset used to conduct the experiments is composed of 982
images sourced from both publicly available and in-house data (only MES 0).
In house data was used only to balance the class imbalance in the MES 0 cate-
gory. The public Hyperkvasir dataset comprises of 851 images [3] and in-house
comprised of 131 images of MES 0. The available dataset included MES scores
(0 to 3); however, it lacked descriptions. We employed the widely used clini-
cally accepted MES scoring description [11,16]. For experiments, we split the
46  F. H. Valencia et al.

images and the corresponding caption labels into 80% for training (785), 10%
for validation (99), and 10% for testing (98) purposes. Table 2 shows the sample
distribution across sets based on the MES, and Fig. 3 illustrates the number of
samples for the endoscopic visual feature descriptors.

    Table 2. Size of train, validation and test set for each MES scoring.

    MES Train Validation Test

    0 177 22               22

    1 145 18               18

    2 362 46               45

    3 101 13               13

Fig. 3. Data distribution. Number of samples for each of the descriptors that are
used to categorise diﬀerent stages of ulcerative colitis.

Protocol for Reference Caption Generation. All labels were conducted by
a the ﬁrst author under the supervision of experts in the domain. Subsequently,
these annotations were reviewed and adjusted by a senior gastroenterologist.
Each image was associated with three distinct reference captions. While the
ﬁnalised captions are derived from these expert-reviewed annotations, they do
adhere to a schema. Speciﬁcally, the descriptions incorporate information from
ﬁve critical endoscopic features: vascular pattern, erythema, friability, the pres-
ence of erosions or ulcers, and the MES. It is important to emphasize that these
Image Captioning for Understanding Ulcerative Colitis  47

captions are dynamic and vary across images, even when they belong to the same
MES grade. For instance, an MES-2 does not necessarily imply the presence of
other tissue features associated with disease severity.

Example of Sample Template: There is [vascular pattern], the mucosa
demonstrates [degree of erythema], [degree of friability], and [erosion/ulcers],
[degree of bleeding] is present; these ﬁndings support a [MES scoring]. It is to be
noted that the template is not static and can diﬀer depending on the mucosal
properties. The same MES grade can have a very diﬀerent descriptive analysis
based on the mucosa.Figure 1 shows examples of the reference captions.

Training Setup. We train our UC image captioning model using the PyTorch

framework on a GPU setup comprising four NVIDIA Tesla K80 GPUs. We use
a learning rate (lr) of 3e−4 and an Adam optimiser. We set 100 epochs with
a batch size of 32 to train the model presented in all experiments. Finally, all
input images were resized to 224 × 224 pixels, and we use a 256-dimensional
word embedding.

Evaluation Metrics. To assess the performance of our classiﬁcation backbones
used in this dataset, we employed widely used F1-score, positive predictive value
(PPV), recall and accuracy. Finally, to assess the performance of our ﬁnal model,
we used a set of evaluation metrics commonly employed in image captioning
tasks. These metrics provide a quantitative measure of how well a model gener-
ates accurate and semantically relevant captions. These include the BLEU (Bilin-
gual Evaluation Understudy) using four diﬀerent n-grams, ROUGE (Recall-
Oriented Understudy for Gisting Evaluation) score which is recall focused metric,
and Cosine similarity which measures the similarity between two texts based on
the cosine of the angle between their vector representations. We also provide,
frames-per second to provide the relative inference time for each model under
investigation.

4.2 Evaluation Results

Quantitative Results. As observed in Table 3, GRU and RNN with
DenseNet121 provided best metric values over other combinations for two-
layered recurrent networks, achieving a BLEU-4 of 0.7352 and 0.7326, respec-
tively. For example, the models which used DenseNet121 as feature extraction
consistently outperformed those using ResNet50 and Res2Net50, with average
improvements in BLEU-4 scores by 31.9% and 30.2%, respectively. Similarly,
models employing GRU as the decoder signiﬁcantly surpassed those using RNN
and LSTM. On average, the GRU-based models improved the BLEU-4 scores
by 3.2% and 4.2% over models using GRU and LSTM, respectively.
48  F. H. Valencia et al.

Qualitative Results. Figure 5 presents examples of the generated captions
for each MES class. The captions are analysed for descriptor identiﬁcation accu-
racy, wherein red highlights indicate incorrectly identiﬁed descriptors, while blue
highlights denote correctly predicted descriptors. Finally, the black words in the
captions correspond to related terms that are contextually expected and hold no
speciﬁc relevance to the descriptor identiﬁcation task.

    As it can be observed in the ﬁgure, the model consistently achieved accurate
predictions for the majority of the desired descriptors in each case, particularly

Table 3. Experimental results on test set for automated image description generation.
The two best results are presented in bold.

 Layers Backbone RU Metrics
                                          BLUE-1 BLUE-2 BLUE-3 BLUE-4 RL CSim FPS

 N = 1 DenseNet121 LSTM 0.8789 0.8166 0.765 0.7203 0.8430 0.8907 22.52
                               GRU 0.8768 0.8133 0.7607 0.7179 0.8430 0.8817 22.86
                               RNN 0.8766 0.8117 0.7593 0.7153 0.8365 0.8863 22.95

           Res2Net50 LSTM 0.772 0.6784 0.6057 0.5491 0.7314 0.7823 33.55
                               GRU 0.7782 0.6948 0.6308 0.5753 0.7405 0.7944 27.18
                               RNN 0.6948 0.6741 0.6167 0.5616 0.7087 0.7635 27.88

           ResNet50 LSTM 0.6308 0.6590 0.5853 0.5357 0.7205 0.7703 32.71
                               GRU 0.5753 0.6699 0.6047 0.5541 0.7178 0.7766 33.55
                               RNN 0.7405 0.6695 0.6103 0.558 0.7087 0.7519 35.84

 N = 2 DenseNet121 LSTM 0.7944 0.8195 0.769 0.7251 0.8911 0.8511 22.28
                               GRU 0.8855 0.8263 0.7783 0.7352 0.8981 0.8478 21.93
                               RNN 0.8847 0.8255 0.7766 0.7326 0.8952 0.8512 21.00

           Res2Net50 LSTM 0.7614 0.6592 0.5843 0.5354 0.7222 0.7222 24.54
                               GRU 0.7760 0.6900 0.6336 0.5807 0.7205 0.7689 25.78
                               RNN 0.7632 0.6619 0.5870 0.5371 0.723 0.7706 27.90

           ResNet50 LSTM 0.7614 0.6592 0.5843 0.5354 0.7222 0.7222 24.54
                               GRU 0.7550 0.6641 0.6073 0.5534 0.7618 0.7058 31.39
                               RNN 0.7623 0.6650 0.5969 0.5476 0.7190 0.7638 33.47

    Fig. 4. Confusion matrix for our best model (DenseNet121-GRU with 2-layers)
Image Captioning for Understanding Ulcerative Colitis  49

from MES-0 to MES-2. In the case of MES-3 examples, the model encoun-
tered challenges in accurately predicting certain instances, such as distinguish-
ing between moderate and severe friability or diﬀerentiating between superﬁcial
and deep ulcers. These speciﬁc endoscopic features present inherent challenges
in discriminating between varying levels of severity.

5 Discussion and Conclusion

In this study, we aimed to investigate, the performance of various combinations
of feature extraction backbones and recurrent units to generated automated
descriptions for UC scoring. Our main objective was to identify the most eﬀec-
tive combination that would produce the most accurate captions based on our
descriptors. We observed that employing the DenseNet121 backbone in conjunc-
tion with 2 layers GRU and RNN obtained overall best performance, with respec-
tive BLEU-4 scores of 0.7352 and 0.7326 for automated UC scoring descriptions

Fig. 5. Examples of generated captions for each MES class using the best model
(DenseNet121 with GRU).
50  F. H. Valencia et al.

(Table 3). This superior performance could be attributed to several factors: 1)
DenseNet121, as a feature extractor, has shown to be particularly eﬀective for
similar tasks [7] and domain [13]; 2) The dense connections and feature reuse
mechanism employed by this feature extractor contribute to enhanced gradient
ﬂow and feature propagation across the network resulting in more diversiﬁed fea-
tures and less redundant parameters; 3) ﬁnally as for the decoder model, despite
its simplicity, the GRU eﬀectively captured the necessary temporal dependencies
in the captioning task since GRU focuses on short-term dependencies, which was
suitable given the short sequence length of our captions.

    The generated captions exhibited a strong similarity between the ground
truth captions. Moreover, our model consistently achieved accurate prediction
of severity levels for most of the endoscopic features, thus eﬀectively grading UC
in the MES-0 to MES-2 classes (Fig. 4). It is important to note that the model
encountered diﬃculties when predicting the MES-3 classiﬁcation, as well as the
associated characteristics indicative of this level of severity. For this classiﬁca-
tion, the model predicted features that were more commonly associated with
an MES-2 classiﬁcation rather than MES-3. This discrepancy could potentially
be attributed to the limited exposure of the model to severe disease instances
during the training phase, thereby aﬀecting its ability to accurately predict more
severe cases.

    In conclusion, our model was capable of generating accurate descriptions
based on the most relevant endoscopic features, thereby eﬀectively grading UC.
Moreover, our study emphasized the value of automated report generation in
addressing the lack of explainability often associated with DL models. By gen-
erating understandable and accurate descriptions, we can develop more trans-
parent and explainable medical diagnosis systems.

Acknowledgements. The authors wish to acknowledge the Mexican Council for Sci-
ence and Technology (CONACYT) for the support in terms of postgraduate scholar-
ships in this project, and the Data Science Hub at Tecnologico de Monterrey for their
support on this project. This work has been supported by Azure Sponsorship credits
granted by Microsoft’s AI for Good Research Lab through the AI for Health program.

References

 1. Ali, S.: Where do we stand in AI for endoscopic image analysis? deciphering gaps
     and future directions. npj Dig. Med. 5(1), 184 (2022)

 2. Bhambhvani, H.P., Zamora, A.: Deep learning enabled classiﬁcation of mayo endo-
     scopic subscore in patients with ulcerative colitis. Eur. J. Gastroenterol. Hepatol.
     33(5), 645–649 (2021)

 3. Borgli, H., et al.: Hyperkvasir, a comprehensive multi-class image and video dataset
     for gastrointestinal endoscopy. Sci. Data 7(1), 283 (2020)

 4. Click, B., Ramos Rivers, C., Koutroubakis, I.E., Babichenko, D., Anderson, A.M.,
     et al.: Demographic and clinical predictors of high healthcare use in patients with
     inﬂammatory bowel disease. Inﬂamm. Bowel Dis. 22(6), 1442–1449 (2016)
Image Captioning for Understanding Ulcerative Colitis  51

 5. Di Ruscio, M., et al.: Role of ulcerative colitis endoscopic index of severity (uceis)
     versus mayo endoscopic subscore (mes) in predicting patients response to biological
     therapy and the need for colectomy. Digestion 102(4), 534–545 (2021)

 6. Fan, Y., et al.: A novel deep learning-based computer-aided diagnosis system for
     predicting inﬂammatory activity in ulcerative colitis. Gastrointest. Endosc. (2022)

 7. Gong, L., et al.: Automatic captioning of early gastric cancer using magniﬁcation
     endoscopy with narrow-band imaging. Gastrointest. Endosc. 96(6), 929–942 (2022)

 8. Ozawa, T., et al.: Novel computer-assisted diagnosis system for endoscopic disease
     activity in patients with ulcerative colitis. Gastrointest. Endosc. 89(2), 416–421
     (2019)

 9. Pagnini, C., Di Paolo, M.C., Mariani, B.M., Urgesi, R., Pallotta, L., et al.: Mayo
     endoscopic score and ulcerative colitis endoscopic index are equally eﬀective for
     endoscopic activity evaluation in ulcerative colitis patients in a real life setting.
     Gastroenterol. Insights 12(2), 217–224 (2021)

10. Rabbenou, W., Ullman, T.A.: Risk of colon cancer and recommended surveillance
     strategies in patients with ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterol. Clin. 49(4), 791–807
     (2020)

11. Schroeder, K.W., Tremaine, W.J., Ilstrup, D.M.: Coated oral 5-aminosalicylic acid
     therapy for mildly to moderately active ulcerative colitis. New Engl. J. Med.
     317(26), 1625–1629 (1987)

12. Stidham, R.W., Liu, W., Bishu, S., Rice, M.D., Higgins, P.D., et al.: Performance
     of a deep learning model vs human reviewers in grading endoscopic disease severity
     of patients with ulcerative colitis. JAMA Netw. Open 2(5), 1–10 (2019)

13. Sutton, R.T., Zaiane, O.R., Goebel, R., Baumgart, D.C.: Artiﬁcial intelligence
     enabled automated diagnosis and grading of ulcerative colitis endoscopy images.
     Sci. Rep. 12(1), 1–10 (2022)

14. Taku, K., Britta, S., Chen, W.S., Ferrante, M., Shen, B., et al.: Ulcerative colitis
     (primer). Nat. Rev. Dis. Primers 6(1) (2020)

15. Travis, S.P., Schnell, D., Krzeski, P., Abreu, M.T., Altman, D.G., et al.: Developing
     an instrument to assess the endoscopic severity of ulcerative colitis: the ulcerative
     colitis endoscopic index of severity (uceis). Gut 61(4), 535–542 (2012)

16. Ungaro, R., Mehandru, S., Allen, P., Peyrin-Biroulet, L., Colombel, J.: Colitis
     ulcerosa. Lancet 389(10080), 1756–1770 (2017)

17. Vashist, N.M., et al.: Endoscopic scoring indices for evaluation of disease activity
     in ulcerative colitis. Cochrane Datab. Syst. Rev. (1) (2018)

18. Xu, Z., Ali, S., East, J., Rittscher, J.: Additive angular margin loss and model
     scaling network for optimised colitis scoring. In: 2022 IEEE 19th International
     Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI), pp. 1–5. IEEE (2022)

19. Xu, Z., Ali, S., Gupta, S., Leedham, S., East, J.E., Rittscher, J.: Patch-level
     instance-group discrimination with pretext-invariant learning for colitis scoring.
     In: Machine Learning in Medical Imaging, pp. 101–110 (2022)
Detection and Segmentation
      Multispectral 3D Masked Autoencoders
      for Anomaly Detection in Non-Contrast

                   Enhanced Breast MRI

  Daniel M. Lang1,2(B), Eli Schwartz3,4, Cosmin I. Bercea1,2,5, Raja Giryes4,
                                  and Julia A. Schnabel1,2,5,6

                           1 Helmholtz Munich, Neuherberg, Germany
                    2 Technical University of Munich, Garching, Germany

                                           daniel.lang@tum.de
                                3 IBM Research AI, Tel Aviv, Israel
                               4 Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel
                                 5 Helmholtz AI, Munich, Germany
                                6 King’s College London, London, UK

         Abstract. Mammography is commonly used as an imaging tech-
         nique in breast cancer screening but comes with the disadvantage
         of a high overdiagnosis rate and low sensitivity in dense tissue.
         Dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE)-magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
         features higher sensitivity but requires time consuming dynamic imag-
         ing and injection of contrast media, limiting the capability of the
         technique as a widespread screening method. In this work, we extend
         the masked autoencoder (MAE) approach to perform anomaly detec-
         tion on volumetric, multispectral MRI. This new model, coined
         masked autoencoder for medical imaging (MAEMI), is trained on two
         non-contrast enhanced breast MRI sequences, aiming at lesion detection
         without the need for intravenous injection of contrast media and tempo-
         ral image acquisition, paving the way for more widespread use of MRI in
         breast cancer diagnosis. During training, only non-cancerous images are
         presented to the model, with the purpose of localizing anomalous tumor
         regions during test time. We use a public dataset for model development.
         Performance of the architecture is evaluated in reference to subtraction
         images created from DCE-MRI. Code has been made publicly available:
         https://github.com/LangDaniel/MAEMI.

1 Introduction

Breast cancer depicts the most commonly diagnosed cancer and leading cancer-
related cause of death in women worldwide [15]. In general, early cancer detection
allows for eﬀective treatment and improves survival substantially [7]. Mammog-
raphy is most frequently employed as a breast cancer screening technique and
was shown to be able to reduce mortality by up to 30% [8]. However, sensitivity

Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45350-2 5.

c The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
S. Ali et al. (Eds.): CaPTion 2023, LNCS 14295, pp. 55–67, 2023.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45350-2_5
56  D. M. Lang et al.

of the approach depends on breast density. For extremely dense tissue 40% of
cancers are not detected [27], while in other cases an overdiagnosis rate of 31%
has been reported [17].

    DCE-MRI refers to the acquisition of images before, during and after intra-
venous injection of contrast media, which improves the signal intensity of neoan-
giogenically induced vascular changes that allows for better detection of lesions
[26]. The technique features a higher sensitivity for detection of breast cancer,
when compared to mammography [23]. However, dynamic imaging and long
scan times in combination with high costs limit widespread use for screening
[16]. Moreover, injection of gadolinium-based contrast agents were identiﬁed to
be able to cause side eﬀects, like nephrogenic systemic ﬁbrosis, which raised con-
cerns about the broader health impact of the technique [10]. Additionally, patient
motion during imaging can lead to artifacts in subtraction images, resulting in
incorrect identiﬁcation of tumor lesions.

    Deep learning algorithms may have the power to overcome the need for
contrast injection and temporal imaging and could be trained on non-contrast
enhanced MRI for tumor detection. However, networks require large amounts of
data with detailed voxel level annotations from medical experts, when trained
in a supervised fashion.

    Unsupervised anomaly detection aims to identify abnormal cases without
the requirement for labeled examples. This can be achieved by reconstruction-
based methods. Models are trained to recover their input, while restrictions on
the architecture are applied. Such restrictions can be imposed by information
bottlenecks [5] or by the alteration of input images via application of noise [14] or
removal of image parts [29]. During training, normal examples are shown to the
model. In this way, the model is only able to reconstruct image parts stemming
from the normal distribution reasonably well, while abnormal image parts result
in higher error rates that can be utilized to generate anomaly maps during test
time. Applications of anomaly detection (AD) in the medical imaging domain
include but are not limited to: chest X-ray, optical coherence tomography (OCT)
and mammography. Most research in the ﬁeld has been conducted on MRI of
the brain, e.g. [2,14].

    We demonstrate the capability of an unsupervised model for anomaly detec-
tion on non-contrast enhanced breast MRI. Namely, the MAE approach of He et
al. [12] is here extended to be able to handle 3D multispectral medical imaging
data, and trained for anomaly detection on a public breast cancer dataset. Per-
formance of the model is evaluated in reference to subtraction images generated
from DCE-MRI.

1.1 Contribution

In this work we demonstrate the capability of anomaly detection models for iden-
tiﬁcation of tumor lesion on non-contrast enhanced MRI. To do so, we remodel
the MAE architecture and extend and further develop the approach of Schwartz
et al. [24], enabling unsupervised anomaly detection on 3D multispectral medical
imaging data. Deﬁnition of input patches of the vision transformer (ViT) archi-
tecture is advanced and the positional embedding employed by He et al. [12] is
MAEMI for Anomaly Detection in Breast MRI  57

reﬁned. During training only healthy, non-cancerous breast MRIs are shown to
the model, aiming to identify breast lesions as anomalies during test time. To
the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to make the following contributions:

– We extend and further adapt MAEs to perform anomaly detection on 3D
   multispectral medical imaging.

– We demonstrate the capability of unsupervised anomaly detection to identify
   pathologies in non-contrast enhanced breast MRI.

– We show that performance of anomaly detection algorithms on non-contrast
   enhanced MRI is on par with that of DCE-MRI generated subtraction images,
   paving the way for a more widespread use of MRI in breast cancer diagnosis.

2 Related Work

Lesions detection on breast MRI has been studied by training of a deep Q-
network [18], modiﬁcation of RetinaNet [1], and utilization of the ResNet archi-
tecture [13]. Synthetic contrast enhancement was investigated by training of a
generative adversarial network (GAN) [19], utilization of a U-Net like architec-
ture [4], and combination of a encoder-decoder architecture with a LSTM layer
[11].

    Notably, all of those approaches were trained on DCE-MRI data, relying on
injection of contrast media, and employed supervised training. To the best of
our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to perform unsupervised anomaly detection on
non-contrast enhanced MRI, without the need for contrasted enhanced images,
even during training.

    The ability of deep convolutional autoencoders (AEs) to perform reconstruc-
tion based unsupervised anomaly detection on imaging data has been investi-
gated by several studies. Kascenas et al. [14] trained a denoising AE on brain
MRI, such that unhealthy pathologies were removed during test time. Zavrtanik
et al. [29] developed a convolutional AE, masking part of the input to perform
inpainting on natural imaging and video data.

    He et al. [12] developed the masked autoencoder (MAE) model on 2D natural
images, to solve a classiﬁcation downstream task. Schwartz et al. [24] modiﬁed
the architecture to allow for anomaly detection on natural imaging data. Here,
we advance the approach to be able to perform anomaly detection on 3D medical
imaging data stemming from diﬀerent input sequences.

    Prabhakar et al. [20] improved the initial MAE architecture by incorporation
of a contrastive and an auxiliary loss term, and trained their architecture on
classiﬁcation of brain MRI. Our model relies on image reconstruction and com-
putation of a voxel-wise diﬀerence in the downstream task. Therefore, we use
unaltered mean squared error (MSE) as a loss.

    Xu et al. [28] developed SwinMAE, embedding Swin transformer in the MAE
architecture, for supervised segmentation of parotid tumors in the downstream
task. They trained their model on MRI, feeding slices from diﬀerent sequences
to the color channels of a 2D model. In contrast, we train our model in 4D,
handling diﬀerent 3D MRI sequences fully unsupervised.
58  D. M. Lang et al.

    Due to its high masking ratio, anomalies are likely to be removed by MAE.
This led Tian et al. [25] to employ the model on anomaly detection in 2D
colonoscopy and X-ray data. They introduced memory-augmented self-attention
and a multi-level cross-attention operator in the underlying ViT architecture, to
limit dependency on random masking. In contrast, we train our model on mul-
tispectral 3D data, without any modiﬁcations applied to the ViT architecture,
maximizing the likelihood for anomalies to be removed by application of a high
number of random masks.

3 Dataset

We used the public Duke-Breast-Cancer-MRI cohort [21,22] from The Cancer
Imaging Archive [6]. The set includes axial breast MRI data of 922 patients com-
prising a non-fat saturated pre-contrast T1-weighted sequence, a fat-saturated
T1-weighted pre-contrast sequence and several post-contrast fat-saturated T1-
weighted sequences. Tumor lesion annotations were given in the form of bounding
boxes and segmentation maps, labeling breast tissue, were provided. We stan-
dardized all images to the same voxel spacing of 0.75mm×0.75mm×1.0mm and
cropped them to involve the chest area only. Intensity values of the images were
normalized to a mean and standard deviation value of 0.5 and 0.25 per image.
Cases involving bilateral breast cancer were removed from the cohort. Thus,
each of the remaining patients exhibited one breast that contained a tumor
lesion, treated as abnormal/unhealthy, and another breast not aﬀected by can-
cer, treated as normal/healthy. The dataset was split into a training set of 745
patients, a validation set of 50 patients and a test set of 100 patients. Notably, no
normal - abnormal pairs of the same patient were involved in diﬀerent datasets.
Due to the high memory requirements of transformer models, MRI-patches of size
240 × 168 × 8 voxels in lateral-posterior-superior (LPS) directions were cropped
from both MRI sequences to be then divided into ViT-patches and processed by
the encoder.

    Following clinical routine, subtraction images S between the image acquired
before Ipre and all of the m images acquired after injection of contrast media
Ipkost were computed:

           S= 1 m           Ipre − Ipkost 2 ∗ min3×3×2,            (1)
                 m
                       k=0

with a minimum ﬁlter of size 3 × 3 × 2 applied for noise removal.

4 Method

A scheme of our model can be seen in the lower part of Fig. 1. We modiﬁed
the ViT architecture of Dosovitskiy et al. [9] to 3D multispectral MRI, i.e. the
positional embedding and deﬁnition of ViT-patches was redeﬁned and enhanced
to incorporate a third dimension, see Fig. 2.
MAEMI for Anomaly Detection in Breast MRI  59

Fig. 1. DCE-MRI imaging vs. MAEMI. For DCE-MRI, several MRIs before, during
and after injection of contrast media are acquired. MAEMI uses diﬀerent random
masks for generation of pseudo-healthy recovered images. Both methods construct
error maps by calculation of the mean squared error diﬀerence between each of the
post-contrast/reconstructed images with the pre-contrast/ uncorrupted image.

Fig. 2. 3D multispectral embedding. ViT-patches from diﬀerent sequences are com-
bined and embedded using a 3D convolutional layer. The positional embedding is
advanced to 3D, adding a additional dimension to the sinusoidal encoding. As for
the MAE model [12], no mask tokens are used in the encoder.

    This 3D-ViT was then embedded in the MAE approach [12], which had to be
extended to be able to handle three dimensional input from diﬀerent sequences.
To do so, generation of mask tokens and random masking of ViT-patches had to
be remodeled. The approach, coined masked autoencoder for medical imaging
(MAEMI), uses a 3D-ViT with 12 transformer blocks and a embedding dimen-
sion of 768 as encoder, while for the decoder a embedding dimension of 384 and
a depth of 4 has been chosen.
60  D. M. Lang et al.

    In addition, we further improved the anomaly detection approach of Schwartz

et al. [24]. MRIs were processed by patches, such that memory requirements of

the transformer based architecture could be reduced, enabling exploitation of

whole MRI volumes from diﬀerent sequences. Only examples of non-cancerous

breast tissue were presented to the model during training. At inference, a strided

overlapping patch scheme, further speciﬁed below, has been chosen, in order to

reduce artifacts on patch borders. Multiple random masks have been used, such

that the likelihood for the anomaly to be removed was maximized.
    Error maps Eis per input sequence s, non-fat saturated (NFS) and

fat saturated (FS), were constructed by computation of the MSE between the

reconstructed patches Ris and the unmasked MRI-patches Is:

                       Eis = (Is − Ris)2 ∗ min3×3×2,  (2)

with a minimum ﬁlter of size 3 × 3 × 2 applied for further reduction of artifacts.
On a voxel level, ﬁnal error scores were computed by the mean value of all patch
predictions. Error maps of both multispectral input sequences, NFS and FS,
were then summed up and convolved with the same minimum ﬁlter as before:

    E=1                ENFS + EFS  ∗ min3×3×2,        (3)
          2

for generation of a ﬁnal image level anomaly map.

Training Speciﬁcs. During training, only MRI-patches of healthy breasts,
containing no tumor lesions, were shown to the model with patches being cropped
randomly. In addition to random cropping, random ﬂipping on the coronal and
sagittal plane was applied as a augmentation technique during training. A batch
size of 6 and a learning rate of 10−3 were applied. Each model was trained
for 1000 epochs. Weights of the trained model of He et al. [12], developed on
ImageNet, were used to initialize the transformer layers in the encoder, while
weights of the encoding layer and the decoder were randomly initialized. During
test time, a stride of 64 × 42 × 2 performing 6 repetitions was used to process
whole MRI volumes.

Evaluation. We used voxel wise area under the receiver operating character-
istics curve and average precision as performance measures. Only voxels inside
the breast tissue segmentation masks were taken into account for computation,
as injection of contrast media also leads to an uptake in tissue outside of the
breast area, see Fig. 7 (Supplementary Material). Furthermore, incorporation of
voxels outside of patients’ body, containing air and therefore obviously no tumor
tissue, would lead to an overestimation of performance.

    Utilizing average precision (AP) as a performance measure, one has to con-
sider the large imbalance between normal and abnormal tissue labels, leading to
an expected small baseline performance. This baseline can be computed by the
number of voxels inside the bounding box normalized by the number of voxels
inside the breast tissue segmentation mask and is given by a value of 0.046 for
the test set.
           MAEMI for Anomaly Detection in Breast MRI    61

5 Results

ViT-patch size and masking ratio have been varied for hyperparameter tuning.
The best performing model featured a masking ratio of 90% and a ViT-patch size
of 8 × 8 × 2. area under the receiver operating characteristics curve (AUROC)
and AP results are shown in Table 1. Example results are shown in Fig. 3.

Table 1. MAEMI achieves a     Table 2. Ablation study on diﬀerent
higher AUROC, while DCE-MRI   (axial) ViT-patch sizes, for a ﬁxed mask-
features a higher AP.         ing ratio of 90%. Smaller patch sizes lead
                              to higher performance.
                    AUROC AP
    MAEMI 0.732 0.081         ViT-patch size AUROC AP
    DCE-MRI 0.705 0.127
                              6×6×4  0.724 0.0784

                              8×8×4  0.712 0.0777

                              12 × 12 × 4 0.660 0.0750

                              24 × 24 × 4 0.546 0.0560

Ablation Studies. We studied the inﬂuence of the patch size and masking
ratio on model performance. Figure 4 presents the dependency of AUROC and
AP on the masking ratio for a ﬁxed ViT-patch size of 8 × 8 × 2. Example results
are given in Fig. 6 in the Supplementary Material. Dependency on the ViT-patch
size for a ﬁxed masking ratio of 90% is given in Table 2. The Nvidia RTX A6000
used for training, featuring 48 GB of memory, only allowed for a smallest size
of 8 × 8 × 2, i.e. a size of 6 × 6 × 2 could not be probed. Therefore, the slice
dimension of ViT-patches was ﬁxed at a value of 4 pixels, probing only diﬀerent
axial sizes.

6 Discussion

We developed a multispectral 3D transformer-based anomaly detection model,
that has been trained to identify breast lesions on non-contrast enhanced MRI.
Model performance was at the same level as for DCE-MRI generated subtraction
images. To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to demonstrate the ability
of breast lesion identiﬁcation relying solely on non-contrast enhanced MRI.

    Eliminating the need for DCE would result in a drastic reduction of costs and
acquisition time, two major factors limiting widespread application of MRI in
breast cancer screening [16]. Patients would be spared from intravenous injection
of contrast media, which is known to be able to cause side eﬀects, and artifacts
in subtraction images, introduced by patient motion, can be removed as a source
of error. Therefore, we paved the way for a more widespread application of MRI
in breast cancer diagnosis. Clinical diﬀerences and beneﬁts between MAEMI and
DCE-MRI will still need to be investigated in a larger clinical study.
62  D. M. Lang et al.

Fig. 3. Example results. The ﬁrst two columns show the non-contrast enhanced images
used as an input to the anomaly detection model, and the last two columns present
subtraction images generated by DCE-MRI and anomaly detection maps generated by
MAEMI, respectively. For patients in rows A, B and C, anomaly maps show superior
performance over subtraction images. For patient D, both methods are able to identify
the pathology. For patient E, our model only detects the borders of the pathology,
while the subtraction image identiﬁes the lesion.

    MAEMI achieved a higher AUROC while DCE-MRI generated subtraction
images resulted in better AP performance. Ground truth annotations were given
in the form of bounding boxes, depicting only a rough delineation of tumor tissue.
Determination of an optimal performance measure remains an active area of
research [3].

    We found an optimal masking ratio of 90% for our model. Tian et al. [25]
employed the standard masking ratio of 75% for their 2D model, and did not
report any ablation studies. Higher masking ratios increase the likelihood of the
anomaly to be removed, leading better results. However, for very high ratios the
model is not able to recover the input reasonably well, see Fig. 6. This is likely
to causes the steep decline in Fig. 4.
MAEMI for Anomaly Detection in Breast MRI  63

Fig. 4. Ablation study on the masking ratio for a ﬁxed ViT-patch size of 8 × 8 × 2.
High masking ratios lead to better performance, with an optimum reached at 90%.
Afterwards, performance suﬀers from a steep decline. This behaviour is likely to be
caused by the fact that larger masking ratios increase the probability of the anomaly
to be removed. However, at a certain level the model is not able to recover the input
images, causing the steep decline.

    In future work, we will test the performance of other anomaly detection
methods for identiﬁcation of tumor lesion on non-contrast enhanced MRI. How-
ever, models are most often developed on 2D data, i.e. on slices of brain MRI,
and have to be advanced to be able to handle 3D data ﬁrst. Furthermore, the
capability of anomaly detection to replace injection of contrast media will also
be studied for other entities, e.g. in liver MRI.

Data Use Declaration. All data used for this study is publicly available from
The Cancer Imaging Archive [6,21] under the CC BY-NC 4.0 license. Code has
been published at: https://github.com/LangDaniel/MAEMI.

Acknowledgements. DML was in part ﬁnanced by the Helmholtz Information and
Data Science Academy (HIDA) under the “Israel Exchange Program”.

Supplementary Material
64  D. M. Lang et al.

Fig. 5. Single reconstruction examples. The left block shows axial slices of T1 non-fat
saturated MRI-patches and the right block T1 fat saturated slices. The ﬁrst column
shows unaltered MRI-patches, the second column the masked model input and the
third column the MRI-patches recovered by MAEMI. Examples represent a masking
ratio of 90% (for the whole 3D patch) and a ViT-patch size of 8×8×2. During inference,
multiple masks are generated to maximize likelihood of anomalies to be removed.

Fig. 6. Reconstruction examples for diﬀerent masking ratios and a ﬁxed ViT-patch
size of 8 × 8 × 2. Very high ratios (>90%) lead blurry images, while moderate ratios
allow for reconstruction of detailed structures. On the one hand, reconstructions need
to be detailed enough to reduce the amount of false positive ﬁndings. On the other,
high masking ratios increase the likelihood of the anomaly to be removed, leading to a
better true positive rate.
MAEMI for Anomaly Detection in Breast MRI  65

Fig. 7. Subtraction images and anomaly maps were multiplied with segmentation
masks to remove anomalies lying obviously outside of the breast tissue. This is mainly
needed as contrast agent is also taken up in organs outside of the breast. The left column
shows the raw subtraction/anomaly map, and the right column the raw maps multi-
plied with the segmentation mask of the image in the upper left corner. Performance
metrics were only calculated for voxels lying inside the segmentation mask, limiting
the inﬂuence of trivial predictions, i.e. voxels that represent air do not containing any
anomalies.

References

 1. Ayatollahi, F., Shokouhi, S.B., Mann, R.M., Teuwen, J.: Automatic breast lesion
     detection in ultrafast DCE-MRI using deep learning. Med. Phys. 48(10), 5897–
     5907 (2021)

 2. Baur, C., Denner, S., Wiestler, B., Navab, N., Albarqouni, S.: Autoencoders for
     unsupervised anomaly segmentation in brain MR images: a comparative study.
     Med. Image Anal. 69, 101952 (2021)

 3. Bercea, C.I., Wiestler, B., Rueckert, D., Schnabel, J.A.: Generalizing unsupervised
     anomaly detection: towards unbiased pathology screening. In: Medical Imaging
     with Deep Learning (2023)

 4. Bˆone, A., et al.: Contrast-enhanced brain MRI synthesis with deep learning: key
     input modalities and asymptotic performance. In: 2021 IEEE 18th International
     Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI), pp. 1159–1163. IEEE (2021)

 5. Chow, J.K., Su, Z., Wu, J., Tan, P.S., Mao, X., Wang, Y.H.: Anomaly detection of
     defects on concrete structures with the convolutional autoencoder. Adv. Eng. Inf.
     45, 101105 (2020)

 6. Clark, K., et al.: The Cancer Imaging Archive (TCIA): maintaining and operating
     a public information repository. J. Dig. Imaging 26, 1045–1057 (2013)

 7. Crosby, D., et al.: Early detection of cancer. Science 375(6586), eaay9040 (2022)
66  D. M. Lang et al.

 8. Dibden, A., Oﬀman, J., Duﬀy, S.W., Gabe, R.: Worldwide review and meta-
     analysis of cohort studies measuring the eﬀect of mammography screening pro-
     grammes on incidence-based breast cancer mortality. Cancers 12(4), 976 (2020)

 9. Dosovitskiy, A., et al.: An image is worth 16×16 words: transformers for image
     recognition at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929 (2020)

10. Fraum, T.J., Ludwig, D.R., Bashir, M.R., Fowler, K.J.: Gadolinium-based contrast
     agents: a comprehensive risk assessment. J. Magn. Reson. Imaging 46(2), 338–353
     (2017)

11. Han, L., et al.: Synthesis-based imaging-diﬀerentiation representation learning for
     multi-sequence 3D/4D MRI. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.00517 (2023)

12. He, K., Chen, X., Xie, S., Li, Y., Doll´ar, P., Girshick, R.: Masked autoencoders are
     scalable vision learners. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
     puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 16000–16009 (2022)

13. Herent, P., et al.: Detection and characterization of MRI breast lesions using deep
     learning. Diagn. Interv. Imaging 100(4), 219–225 (2019)

14. Kascenas, A., Pugeault, N., O’Neil, A.Q.: Denoising autoencoders for unsupervised
     anomaly detection in brain MRI. In: International Conference on Medical Imaging
     with Deep Learning, pp. 653–664. PMLR (2022)

15. Lei, S., et al.: Global patterns of breast cancer incidence and mortality: a
     population-based cancer registry data analysis from 2000 to 2020. Cancer Com-
     mun. 41(11), 1183–1194 (2021)

16. Leithner, D., Moy, L., Morris, E.A., Marino, M.A., Helbich, T.H., Pinker, K.:
     Abbreviated MRI of the breast: does it provide value? J. Magn. Reson. Imaging
     49(7), e85–e100 (2019)

17. Løberg, M., Lousdal, M.L., Bretthauer, M., Kalager, M.: Beneﬁts and harms of
     mammography screening. Breast Cancer Res. 17(1), 1–12 (2015)

18. Maicas, G., Carneiro, G., Bradley, A.P., Nascimento, J.C., Reid, I.: Deep reinforce-
     ment learning for active breast lesion detection from DCE-MRI. In: Descoteaux,
     M., et al. (eds.) MICCAI 2017. LNCS, vol. 10435, pp. 665–673. Springer, Cham
     (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-66179-7 76

19. Mu¨ller-Franzes, G., et al.: Using machine learning to reduce the need for contrast
     agents in breast MRI through synthetic images. Radiology 307(3), e222211 (2023)

20. Prabhakar, C., Li, H.B., Yang, J., Shit, S., Wiestler, B., Menze, B.: ViT-AE++:
     improving vision transformer autoencoder for self-supervised medical image repre-
     sentations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.07382 (2023)

21. Saha, A., et al.: Dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance images of breast
     cancer patients with tumor locations. Cancer Imaging Arch. (2021)

22. Saha, A., et al.: A machine learning approach to radiogenomics of breast cancer: a
     study of 922 subjects and 529 DCE-MRI features. Brit. J. cancer 119(4), 508–516
     (2018)

23. Sardanelli, F., et al.: Sensitivity of MRI versus mammography for detecting foci of
     multifocal, multicentric breast cancer in fatty and dense breasts using the whole-
     breast pathologic examination as a gold standard. Am. J. Roentgenol. (2012)

24. Schwartz, E., et al.: MAEDAY: MAE for few and zero shot AnomalY-Detection.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.14307 (2022)

25. Tian, Y., et al.: Unsupervised anomaly detection in medical images with a memory-
     augmented multi-level cross-attentional masked autoencoder. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2203.11725 (2022)

26. Turnbull, L.W.: Dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI in the diagnosis and management
     of breast cancer. NMR Biomed. Int. J. Dev. Dev. Appl. Magn. Reson. Vivo 22(1),
     28–39 (2009)
MAEMI for Anomaly Detection in Breast MRI  67

27. Wanders, J.O., et al.: Volumetric breast density aﬀects performance of digital
     screening mammography. Breast Cancer Res. Treat. 162, 95–103 (2017)

28. Xu, Z., et al.: Swin MAE: masked autoencoders for small datasets. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2212.13805 (2022)

29. Zavrtanik, V., Kristan, M., Skoˇcaj, D.: Reconstruction by inpainting for visual
     anomaly detection. Pattern Recogn. 112, 107706 (2021)
               Non-redundant Combination
         of Hand-Crafted and Deep Learning
         Radiomics: Application to the Early

             Detection of Pancreatic Cancer

             Rebeca V´etil1,2(B), Cl´ement Abi-Nader2, Alexandre Boˆne2,
             Marie-Pierre Vullierme3, Marc-Michel Roh´e2, Pietro Gori1,

                                      and Isabelle Bloch1,4

          1 LTCI, T´el´ecom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Paris, France
                               2 Guerbet Research, Villepinte, France
                                       rebeca.vetil@guerbet.com

                  3 Department of Radiology, Hospital of Annecy-Genevois,
                                   Universit´e de Paris, Paris, France

                       4 Sorbonne Universit´e, CNRS, LIP6, Paris, France

         Abstract. We address the problem of learning Deep Learning
         Radiomics (DLR) that are not redundant with Hand-Crafted Radiomics
         (HCR). To do so, we extract DLR features using a VAE while enforcing
         their independence with HCR features by minimizing their mutual infor-
         mation. The resulting DLR features can be combined with hand-crafted
         ones and leveraged by a classiﬁer to predict early markers of cancer. We
         illustrate our method on four early markers of pancreatic cancer and val-
         idate it on a large independent test set. Our results highlight the value
         of combining non-redundant DLR and HCR features, as evidenced by an
         improvement in the Area Under the Curve compared to baseline methods
         that do not address redundancy or solely rely on HCR features.

       Keywords: Early Diagnosis · Pancreatic Cancer · Radiomics ·
       Variational Autoencoders · Mutual Information

1 Introduction

Computational methods in medical imaging hold the potential to support radi-
ologists in the early diagnosis of cancer, either by detecting small-size abnormal
neoplasms [14], or even earlier in the disease course by recognizing indirect signs
of malignancy. Such signs are usually subtle and organ-dependent, thus requir-
ing a time-consuming and demanding clinical assessment. For example, in the
case of pancreatic cancer, radiologists analyze the overall shape of the organ,
check for fat replacement and note whether the pancreas shows atrophy and/or
senile characteristics [7,18,19]. The identiﬁcation of cancerous signs using auto-
mated tools can be based on radiomics, which are descriptors of texture and

c The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
S. Ali et al. (Eds.): CaPTion 2023, LNCS 14295, pp. 68–82, 2023.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45350-2_6
Non-redundant Combination of Hand-Crafted and Deep Learning Radiomics  69

shape of a medical image, computed based on spatial relationships between vox-
els and their intensity distribution [11,12]. Radiomics can be divided into two
categories: (i) Hand-Crafted Radiomics (HCR), which are based on predeﬁned
mathematical formulas [11,12]; (ii) Deep Learning Radiomics (DLR), estimated
using deep neural networks [10,23], which may unveil additional complex rela-
tionships between voxels. HCR are generally extracted by open-source frame-
works such as pyradiomics [24]. While such tools facilitate the standardization
of the HCR, they only provide a limited number of predeﬁned features. On the
other hand, DLR features are typically extracted using either discriminative
or generative models. Discriminative models frequently rely on one or multiple
simple CNNs [3–5,13,20]. To prevent overﬁtting, some methods extract DLR
by utilizing pretrained models trained on large datasets like ImageNet [3,5,20].
The deep neural networks commonly employed for computing these DLR fea-
tures consist of multiple layers, with each layer producing potential features as
its output. As a result, the choice of the layers to retain varies, with each method
employing diﬀerent heuristics to identify them [5,20]. In the realm of generative
models, auto-encoder (AE) networks are widely used [2]. AEs encode an image
in a latent vector that is subsequently used to reconstruct the original image.
This latent vector is considered to encapsulate the most descriptive features of
the input image, making it a natural choice for representing the DLR [10,21].

    The two types of radiomics are complementary: the computation of DLR
is data-driven, which ensures that the extracted features are adapted to a spe-
ciﬁc problem or type of data. On the other hand, the predeﬁned and generic
deﬁnitions of HCR may make them less adapted for a given speciﬁc task, but
favors generalization and interpretability. Therefore, it has been recently pro-
posed to combine HCR with DLR, arguing that this approach could result in
an improved feature set for predictive or prognostic models [2]. The literature
reports two main approaches to perform this combination: decision-level meth-
ods that train separate classiﬁers on DLR and HCR before aggregating their
predictions [3,5,16], and feature-level methods that concatenate the two types
of radiomics in a single feature vector which is then leveraged by a classiﬁer
[4,13,20]. These approaches extract HCR and DLR features independently, with-
out guaranteeing complementarity between the two sets of features. As a result,
the extracted DLR may be highly redundant with the HCR, limiting the value
of their combination.

    Given this context, we propose to extract DLR features that will complement
the information already contained in the HCR. Our contributions are two-fold:

– A deep learning method, based on the VAE framework [9], that extracts non-
   redundant DLR features with respect to a predetermined set of HCR. This
   is achieved by minimizing the mutual information between the two types of
   radiomics during the training of the VAE. The resulting HCR and DLR fea-
   tures are leveraged to predict early markers of cancer.

– Validation of the proposed approach in the case of pancreatic cancer, using
   2319 training and 1094 test subjects collected from 9 medical institutions with
   a split performed at the institution level. This is all the more important as
   most combination approaches have been solely evaluated in a cross-validation
   setting on mono-centric data [3,5,16].
70  R. V´etil et al.

Fig. 1. Overview of our method. Starting from a masked image, Hand-Crafted
Radiomics (HCR) are calculated analytically, while Deep Learning Radiomics (DLR)
are extracted by the encoder of a VAE. These two types of radiomics are subsequently
combined and given to the decoder for image reconstruction. The independence of HCR
and DLR is enforced by the minimization of the Mutual Information (MI). The latter
is approximated by the density-ratio trick [8], involving a discriminator Dλ. Following
the training of the VAE, a classiﬁer CM can be trained using both the HCR and DLR
features to predict a speciﬁc marker of interest.

2 Method

Our method, illustrated in Fig. 1, relies on a generative model that recreates a 3D
input image from the concatenation of HCR and DLR features. Feature extrac-
tion is done analytically for the HCR and through a VAE encoder for the DLR.
Independence between the features is encouraged through the minimization of
their mutual information, which is estimated by a discriminator relying on the
density-ratio trick [8]. Finally, the resulting features are given to a classiﬁer for
cancer marker prediction.

Generative Framework. Let x ∈ RV be a 3D image acquired via a standard
imaging technique, and y ∈ {0, 1}V the corresponding binary segmentation mask

of a given organ, with V the number of voxels. In order to focus on a speciﬁc

organ and facilitate the extraction of speciﬁc features, we work on the masked
image x∗ = x × y. We postulate the existence of a generative model enabling us
to create an image x∗ from a low-dimensional representation space [h, d] where
h ∈ RNh and d ∈ RNd represent the HCR and DLR features with Nh and Nd
being the number of hand-crafted and deep features, respectively. Assuming that
x∗ follows an independent and identically distributed Gaussian distribution, and

that fθ is a non-linear function mapping the concatenation of vectors [h, d] to
the masked image x∗, we hypothesize the following generative process:

    pθ (x∗  |  y,     h, d)  =        V    √1      exp  (x∗v  −  fθ ([h,  d])v )2  (1)
                                v=1/yv =1    2πσ2                 2σ2
Non-redundant Combination of Hand-Crafted and Deep Learning Radiomics                71

HCR and DLR Features Computation. We place ourselves within the

VAE framework [9] and assume that p(d) follows a Gaussian distribution with
zero mean and identity covariance. HCR features are calculated analytically,

while DLR features are computed by introducing the approximate posterior
distribution qφ(d | x∗). We hypothesize qφ(d | x∗) ∼ N (μφ(x∗), σφ2 (x∗)I), and
maximize a lower bound of the marginal log-likelihood log pθ(x∗ | y). We obtain
the following loss function:

LVAE = − Eqφ(d|x∗)[log(pθ(x∗ | y, h, d))] + KL[qφ(d | x∗) | p(d)]                    (2)

where KL refers to the Kullback-Leibler divergence.

Mutual Information Minimization. To promote the independence between

HCR and DLR features, we propose to minimize their Mutual Information (MI),
expressed here as KL[q(h, d) | q(h)q(d)], where q(h, d) represents the joint distri-
bution of the DLR and HCR features, and q(h)q(d) the product of their marginal
distributions. These terms involve mixtures with a large number of components,

making them intractable. Moreover, obtaining the direct Monte Carlo estimate

necessitates processing the entire dataset in a single pass. Thus, we sample from

these distributions to compute the MI: to sample from q(h, d), we randomly
choose an image xi∗, extract its HCR features hi as well as its DLR features
di using the VAE encoder, and concatenate them. Samples from q(h)q(d) are
obtained by concatenating vectors hk and dj with k = j. Finally, to compute
the MI, we need to compute the density-ratio between q(h, d) and q(h)q(d). To
do so, we resort to the density-ratio trick [8], which consists in introducing a
discriminator Dλ([h, d]) able to discriminate between samples from q(h, d) and
samples from q(h)q(d). Thus, we obtain:

KL[q(h, d) | q(h)q(d)] = Eq(h,d)  log q(h, d)    ≈     ReLU  log Dλ(hi, di)       .  (3)
                                       q(h)q(d)                   1 − Dλ(hi, di)
                                                    i

where the ReLU function forces the estimate of the MI to be positive, which
prevents from back-propagating wrong estimates of the density-ratio. Dλ imple-
mentation is detailed in Sect. A.1 of the appendix.

Optimization. The ﬁnal loss function is:

L = LVAE + κKL[q(h, d) | q(h)q(d)]                                                   (4)

This loss function is composed of two terms: the left-hand term, which is the com-
mon VAE loss function and promotes the reconstruction of the masked image
while regularizing the approximate posterior distribution; and the right-hand
term which minimizes the MI between q(h, d) and q(h)q(d), and enforces the
extraction of DLR features which are not redundant with HCR features. The
importance of the MI in the loss function is weighted by κ, which we empiri-
cally set to 1 (see Sect. A.2 of the appendix for more details). To ensure that
72  R. V´etil et al.

Fig. 2. Portal CT scans showing early markers of pancreatic cancer. Pancreas
are delineated in orange. (A) shows a normal pancreas. White arrows indicate an
abnormal enlarged tail (B), a parenchymal atrophy (C), fat replacement in the neck of
the pancreas (D) and senile characteristics (E). (Color ﬁgure online)

the density-ratio is well-estimated, as explained in [8], we opt for an alternate
optimization scheme between the VAE model and the discriminator Dλ: every 5
epochs, we freeze the optimization of the VAE, train the discriminator for 150
epochs, and continue the optimization of the VAE model.

Early Cancer Markers Prediction. Once the VAE model is trained, DLR
can be extracted and leveraged to predict cancer markers. We propose to train,
for each marker of interest, a classiﬁer CM based on the concatenation of HCR
and DLR extracted by our model. Unlike VAE training, which is unsupervised
and task-agnostic, CM training is supervised and speciﬁc to a cancer marker.

3 Experiments

We illustrate our method on the pancreas, for which we aim to predict four early
markers of abnormality that manifest prior to the onset of visible lesions:

 (i) Abnormal shape: Changes in the shape of the pancreas can be associated
      with pancreatic cancer as the tumor growth can lead to various structural
      changes in the pancreas [15,25];

(ii) Atrophy: Pancreatic atrophy may signal pancreatic cancer [19] and can indi-
      cate small isodense lesions [26];

(iii) Fat replacement: Fat replacement is characterized by the accumulation of
      fat within the pancreas and is associated with various metabolic diseases,
      pancreatitis, pancreatic cancer, and precancer [7,17,19]. While this mainly
      modiﬁes the texture, severe fat replacement can also aﬀect the shape by
      inducing lobulated margins;

(iv) Senility: Anatomical changes in the pancreas, such as pancreatic atrophy,
      fatty replacement and ﬁbrosis have been documented in elderly individuals
      and increase the susceptibility of individuals to pancreatic cancer [7,18].

These early signs are illustrated in Fig. 2.
Non-redundant Combination of Hand-Crafted and Deep Learning Radiomics  73

Dataset. Data were obtained from our private cohort and split into two inde-
pendent datasets DT rain and DT est, containing 2319 and 1094 abdominal portal
CT scans from six and three independent medical centers, respectively. The ref-

erence labels regarding the early markers previously described were obtained

based on the assessment of the CT scan by a pool of 7 radiologists. Reference
labels were collected for 676 cases of DT rain and all the subjects from DT est.

Preprocessing. For all the subjects, pancreas segmentation masks were

obtained using a segmentation model derived from the nnU-Net [6] and manually

reviewed by radiologists. The CT images and corresponding masks were resam-
pled to 1 × 1 × 2 mm3 in the (x, y, z) directions, and centered in a volume of size
192×128×64 voxels. Images intensities were clipped to the [0.5, 99.5] percentiles
and standardized based on the percentiles, mean and standard deviation of the
pancreas intensities in DT rain.

Extracting HCR and DLR. 32 HCR features were extracted utilizing the
pyradiomics library [24], focusing exclusively on shape and ﬁrst-order intensity
features (see Sect. A.3 in the appendix for the comprehensive list). Complemen-
tary DLR features were extracted using the VAE model of Sect. 2. The architec-
ture followed the U-Net [22] encoder-decoder scheme without skip connections.
The number of convolutional layers and the convolutional blocks were automati-
cally inferred thanks to the nnU-Net self-conﬁguring procedure [6] (see Sect. A.4
in the appendix for details). The model was trained on DT rain for 1000 epochs.
The dimension of DLR features d was set to 32, resulting in a ﬁnal latent space
dimension for the VAE of 64. Data augmentation consisting of rotation and
cropping was applied during training.

Predicting Early Cancer Markers. For each marker, a logistic regression

was trained based on the concatenation of HCR and DLR features extracted
from the subjects in DT rain for whom reference labels were available. The logis-
tic regression was regularized using L2 penalty, with a default regularization
coeﬃcient of 1. Final predictions for DT est were derived by ensembling models

obtained through a four-fold cross-validation setup.

4 Results

Quantitative Results. To demonstrate the usefulness of extracting DLR with
MI minimization, two VAEs were trained. Both followed the same procedure
(detailed in Fig. 1) but diﬀered only in the presence or absence of the MI min-
imization term in their loss function. Then, several logistic regression models
with diﬀerent inputs were trained in order to assess the eﬀect of combining HCR
and DLR features. In total, the following experiments were run:
74        R. V´etil et al.

– HCR only: H32 and H64. These two experiments use the 32 basic HCR
   features described in Sect. A.3 of the appendix, and H64 uses a further 32 HCR
   gray-level features calculated by the pyradiomics library [24] and selected by

   recursive feature elimination.
– DLR only: DM 32I and D32. 32 DLR features extracted by a VAE with and

   without MI minimization, respectively;
– HCR + DLR: HD6M4I and HD64. 32 basic HCR features + 32 DLR features

   extracted by a VAE with and without MI minimization, respectively.

Thus, the logistic regressions of H32, D32 and D3M2I used vectors of size 32, while
those of H64, HD64 and HDM 64I used vectors of size 64. Prediction results for each
of the four cancer markers are presented in Table 1.

Table 1. Pancreatic cancer marker prediction. For each experiment, we report
the means and standard deviations of the AUC (in %) obtained by bootstrapping with
10000 repetitions. For each line, ﬁrst and second best results are in bold and underlined,
respectively. The last row shows the diﬀerence in AUC compared with H32, averaged
over the diﬀerent markers. DLR and HCR refer to Deep Learning Radiomics and Hand-
Crafted Radiomics, respectively.

             HCR only            DLR only          HCR + DLR

             H32            H64  D32       DM 32I  HD64  HDM 64I

Abnormal Shape 68.38± 0.07 68.11± 0.07 67.66± 0.07 72.41± 0.07 71.2± 0.07 70.07± 0.07

Atrophy      81.05± 0.06 81.57± 0.05 74.08± 0.07 79.08± 0.06 80.82± 0.06 82.57± 0.06

Fat Replacement 70.55± 0.07 69.78± 0.08 65.96± 0.08 65.74± 0.07 69.28± 0.08 71.05± 0.07

Senility     71.63± 0.08 70.21± 0.08 70.18± 0.07 69.1± 0.08 72.28± 0.08 72.44± 0.07

δ w.r.t H32  –              –0.48± 0.07 –3.43± 0.07 –1.32± 0.07 0.49± 0.07 1.13± 0.07

    The comparison between H32 and H64 showed that adding 32 gray-level HCR
features was not beneﬁcial as results were similar, or even decreased: for instance,

for senility, the AUC went from 71.63 % (H32) to 70.21 % (H64). On average,
the AUC of H64 lost -0.48 points compared with H32. These experiments demon-
strated the power of the 32 basic HCR features, and the need to ﬁnd comple-

mentary features that would add value.
    Then, for almost all markers, H32 outperformed D32 and DM 32I, meaning that

no VAE, whether trained with or without MI minimization, managed to auto-

matically extract 32 DLR features as informative as the 32 basic HCR features

used by H32. For texture-related markers, such as fat replacement and senil-
ity, MI minimization did not produce clear diﬀerences. On the other hand, on
shape-related markers, the DLR features learned by DM 32I were shown to be more
relevant than those learned by D32 with a basic VAE. Thus, on average, DLR
features were better when extracted by a VAE trained with MI minimization,

but still proved less informative than HCR features.
    Finally, experiments HD64 and HD6M4I showed that combining the two types

of radiomics is beneﬁcial since the average AUC gained 0.49 (HD64) and 1.13 %
Non-redundant Combination of Hand-Crafted and Deep Learning Radiomics  75

(HDM 64I) compared to H32. Yet, results demonstrated that minimizing the redun-
dancy produced the best results compared with all other approaches. Indeed, in

HD64, adding 32 DLR features produced variable results depending on the mark-
ers: compared to H32, the AUC increased by a maximum of 2.82% for abnormal
shape prediction, and dropped by a maximum of 1.27% for predicting fat replace-
ment. On the other hand, HDM 64I outperformed H32 on all prediction problems,
meaning that the non-redundant DLR features systematically provided useful

information.

Inﬂuence of the Latent Space. To explore the inﬂuence of the latent space
dimension on the prediction performances, we replicated the HD6M4I experiment
with increasing size L of the latent space, and reported prediction results in

Table 2. Table 2 shows that increasing the latent space size resulted in lower

classiﬁcation performances. Speciﬁcally, a latent space size of 32 provided the

most relevant DLR features.

Table 2. Pancreatic cancer marker prediction with varying latent space size.
For each experiment, a VAE with Mutual Information (MI) minimization and latent
space size L was trained. Predictions were obtained after training logistic regressions on
32 basic HCR features + L DLR features extracted by a VAE with MI minimization.
We report the means and standard deviations of the AUC (in %) obtained on the
test set by bootstrapping with 10000 repetitions. For each line, ﬁrst best results are in
bold. DLR and HCR refer to Deep Learning Radiomics and Hand-Crafted Radiomics,
respectively.

          L = 32  L = 64 L = 256 L = 512  L = 1024 L = 2048

Abnormal Shape 70.07± 0.07 69.02± 0.07 68.87± 0.07 69.91± 0.07 69.33± 0.07 68.68± 0.07

Atrophy   82.57± 0.06 82.28± 0.05 81.77± 0.06 82.68± 0.05 80.9± 0.06 80.21± 0.06

Fat Replacement 71.05± 0.07 70.91± 0.07 70.23± 0.08 70.45± 0.08 69.55± 0.07 68.96± 0.08

Senility  72.44± 0.07 72.02± 0.07 70.38± 0.08 71.65± 0.08 72.03± 0.07 69.6± 0.08

Qualitative Results. To visualize the eﬀect of the extracted DLR features, we
looked at the absolute value of the logistic regression weights for D32 and DM 32I
in two ways. In Fig. 3-A, the absolute value of these coeﬃcients are displayed.

The higher the absolute value of the coeﬃcient, the higher its importance in the

logistic regression prediction. When the MI was not minimized, HCR features

had stronger importance than DLR ones. On the other hand, when we encour-

aged the independence between the two types of features through MI minimiza-

tion, the contribution of DLR features to the prediction increased. Figure 3-B
shows the number of DLR features among the k features with highest impor-
tance, for increasing values of k. HD6M4I and HD64 are shown in blue and orange,
respectively. In addition, two extreme scenarios are shown: one where the logis-

tic regression is predominantly inﬂuenced by the DLR features (in green), and
76  R. V´etil et al.

another one where the logistic regression is primarily driven by the HCR features

(in red). We can see that the blue curve approached the green curve, meaning
that DLR features from HD6M4I contributed more to the outcome prediction.
When the MI was not minimized, DLR features had less inﬂuence on the pre-

dictions as the orange curve approached the scenario in which DLR would be

ignored.

Reconstruction Performances. To explore the reconstruction performances

of the VAE, we computed the average l2 error per voxel between the original test
images and their corresponding reconstructions. Upon applying nnU-Net’s [6]

automatic intensity normalization procedure, voxel intensities were observed to
range from −3 to 2.3. Speciﬁcally, we employed a VAE with a latent space
dimension of L = 32 and MI minimization during training. The resulting recon-
struction error was found to be (4.4 ± 1.4) × 10−3, which was comparable to
the l2 error obtained from a VAE trained without MI minimization, amount-
ing to (4.1 ± 1.4) × 10−3. These observations suggest that the introduction of
MI minimization did not signiﬁcantly impact the quality of the reconstructed

images, neither resulting in deterioration nor improvement. Additionally, Table 3

Fig. 3. Qualitative assessment of the Deep Learning Radiomics (DLR) and
Hand-Crafted Radiomics (HCR) features through the coeﬃcients of the
logistic regressions. A: Absolute value of the coeﬃcients of the logistic regressions.
We plot, for each logistic regression corresponding to one marker, the absolute value of
the coeﬃcient for each of the 64 features. The ﬁrst 32 features corresponded to DLR,
while the 32 remaining features corresponded to HCR. B: Number of DLR features
among the top k features. Dashed lines represent the extreme scenarios in which all 32
DLR are more informative than all 32 HCR (green) or all 32 HCR are more informative
than all 32 DLR (red). (Color ﬁgure online)

Table 3. Reconstruction performances with varying latent space sizes. For
each experiment, a VAE with Mutual Information minimization and latent space size
L was trained. We report the l2 error per voxel between the original image and its
reconstruction, with voxel intensities varying in [−3, 2.3].

                             L = 32 L = 64 L = 256 L = 512 L = 1024 L = 2048
         l2 error ×103 4.4± 1.4 4.4± 1.4 4.4± 1.4 4.4± 1.4 4.3± 1.4 4.3± 1.5
Non-redundant Combination of Hand-Crafted and Deep Learning Radiomics  77

further explores the relationship between reconstruction performance and latent
space sizes, demonstrating that increasing the latent space size did not have a
discernible eﬀect on the quality of the reconstructions.

5 Discussion and Conclusion

We presented a method to learn DLR features that are not redundant with
HCR ones. The method was based on the well-known VAE framework [9] that
extracted DLR features from masked images in an unsupervised manner. The
complementarity between the two types of radiomics features was enforced by
minimizing their MI, and the resulting features were used to train classiﬁers
predicting diﬀerent cancer markers. Experiments in the case of four early mark-
ers of pancreatic cancer indicated that our method increased prediction perfor-
mances with respect to two state-of-the-art approaches. These ﬁndings suggest
that our approach holds potential to improve patient survival outcomes. Quali-
tative results conﬁrmed the advantages of minimizing the MI during training, as
it resulted in the generation of DLR features that were complementary to HCR
features and more prominently utilized for marker prediction. These results were
obtained on a large and independent test set, which is particularly important as
radiomics models require robust validation strategies to ensure their generaliza-
tion and reproducibility when applied to new datasets [1]. With this in mind,
it might be interesting to further encourage this feature eﬃciency by imposing
independence between the DLR features themselves. Another research avenue
could be to simplify the proposed pipeline by developing an end-to-end network
capable of performing both feature extraction and classiﬁcation tasks within a
uniﬁed framework. Achieving this objective would necessitate the simultaneous
training of the feature extractor and multiple sub-networks for each classiﬁcation
task. However, this approach might pose challenges in terms of training complex-
ity, particularly due to the presence of substantial class imbalances across the
various classiﬁcation tasks. Alternatively, another possibility is to train an end-
to-end convolutional neural network (CNN). Although more direct in nature,
this approach would entail the training of a separate CNN for each question,
which could be computationally heavier compared to the calibration of a logistic
regression based on a single feature extractor, as suggested in our current work.
Future studies should also address the interpretability of the extracted DLR
features, as this aspect was not covered in the present work.

Acknowledgments. This work was partly funded by a CIFRE grant from ANRT #
2020/1448.

A Appendix

A.1 Estimating the Mutual Information
The Mutual Information (MI) is estimated following the density-ratio trick [8]
which requires to train a discriminator Dλ predicting whether concatenated
78  R. V´etil et al.

radiomics vectors [h, d] come from q(h, d) or q(h)q(d). Samples for training Dλ
are obtained following the procedure shown in Fig. 4. In practice, Dλ is modeled
as a 2-layer Multi Layer Perceptron with ReLu activation, which is trained by

minimizing a binary cross-entropy (BCE) loss term. Once the discriminator is

trained, the MI between HCR and DLR features can be approximated as follows:

    MI(h, d) = Eq(h,d)        q(h, d)  ≈     ReLU  log  1  Dλ(hi, di)    .  (5)
                        log q(h)q(d)                       − Dλ(hi, di)
                                          i

Fig. 4. Training Dλ. Given three diﬀerent input images x∗i , x∗j and xk∗, the corre-
sponding HCR and DLR features are computed: hj, hj, hk and di, dj, dk. Samples
from q(h, d) are obtained by concatenating features of a same image (hi and di for
instance), while samples from q(h)q(d) are obtained by concatenating hk and dj with
k = j.

A.2 Inﬂuence of the Hyperparameter κ

The ﬁnal loss function for training our model is:

                        L = LVAE + κKL[q(h, d) | q(h)q(d)]                  (6)

where κ is a hyperparameter weighting the importance of the the mutual infor-
mation in the total loss function. Table 4 reports prediction results obtained
with diﬀerent values of κ. According to these results, κ was set to 1 in all our
experiments.

Table 4. Cancer marker prediction scores for diﬀerent values of κ. For each
experiment, we report the means and standard deviations of the AUC (in %) obtained
by bootstrapping with 10000 repetitions. For each line, best result is in bold.

                        κ = 0.01 κ = 0.1 κ = 1              κ = 10

    General Shape 70.44± 0.07 70.01± 0.07 70.07± 0.07 71.03± 0.07

    Atrophy             80.82± 0.05 81.43± 0.06 82.57± 0.06 80.77± 0.06

    Fat Replacement 69.52± 0.08 70.5± 0.07 71.05± 0.07 68.65± 0.08

    Senility            73.14± 0.08 72.36± 0.08 72.44± 0.07 72.38± 0.08
Non-redundant Combination of Hand-Crafted and Deep Learning Radiomics  79

A.3 HCR Features Extraction

32 HCR features were extracted using the pyradiomics library [24]:

– 14 shape features describing the size and shape of the pancreas
      • Mesh Volume
      • Voxel Volume
      • Surface Area
      • Surface Area to Volume ratio
      • Sphericity
      • Maximum 3D diameter
      • Maximum 2D diameter in the axial plane
      • Maximum 2D diameter in the coronal plane
      • Maximum 2D diameter in the sagittal plane
      • Major Axis Length
      • Minor Axis Length
      • Least Axis Length
      • Elongation
      • Flatness

– 18 ﬁrst-order intensity features describing the intensities distribution
   within the organ
      • Energy
      • Total Energy
      • Entropy
      • Minimum
      • 10th percentile
      • 90th percentile
      • Maximum
      • Mean
      • Median
      • Interquartile Range
      • Range
      • Mean Absolute Deviation
      • Robust Mean Absolute Deviation
      • Root Mean Squared
      • Skewness
      • Kurtosis
      • Variance
      • Uniformity

More details about each feature can be found on the online documentation.
80  R. V´etil et al.

A.4 Model Architecture

As detailed in Fig. 5, the proposed variational autoencoder (VAE) followed a 3D
encoder-decoder architecture. The network topology (number of convolutions
per block, ﬁlter sizes) was chosen based on the nnU-Net self-conﬁguring proce-
dure [6], resulting in 1, 110, 240 trainable parameters. The VAE was trained on
1000 epochs with a batch size of size 32. Every 5 epochs, the VAE was frozen and
the discriminator Dλ was trained for 150 epochs with a batch size equal to the
total training dataset. The VAE and Dλ were optimized using two independent
Adam optimizers with a learning rate of 10−3.

    F=(1,3,3), S=(1,1,1)
        F=(3,3,3), S=(1,1,1)
              F=(3,3,3), S=(1,2,2)
                  F=(3,3,3), S=(1,1,1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                            F=(1,1,1), S=(1,1,1)
    (b, 4, 64, 64, 96)
    b = batch size

                                                                                            (b, 1, 64, 128, 192)

    (b, 8, 32, 32, 48)                                                                Mean
               (b, 16, 16, 16, 24)

                        (b, 32, 8, 8, 12)
                                  (b, 64, 4, 4, 6)

                                                                                      Std

    Input of size (b, 1, 64, 128, 192)                                                     Sampling: = + ∙ , ~ ,
    ConvoluƟon (ﬁlter size F, stride S) + instance norm + leaky ReLU                       Sampled vector z of size (b, latent dimension)
    ConvoluƟon (ﬁlter size [3, 3, 3], stride [2, 2, 2]) + instance norm + leaky ReLU       Transposed ConvoluƟon (ﬁlter size [2, 2, 2], stride [2, 2, 2])
    ConvoluƟon (ﬁlter size [3, 3, 3], stride [1, 1, 1]) + instance norm + leaky ReLU       Transposed ConvoluƟon (ﬁlter size [1, 2, 2], stride [1, 2, 2])
    FlaƩened vector of size (b, 64 x 4 x 4 x 6)                                            ConvoluƟon (ﬁlter size [3, 3, 3], stride [1, 1, 1]) + instance norm + leaky ReLU
    Linear Layer                                                                           Output of size (b, 1, 64, 128, 192)
    Vector of size (b, latent dimension)                                                   Sigmoid

                        Fig. 5. Architecture of the proposed VAE

References

 1. Aerts, H.J., et al.: Decoding tumour phenotype by noninvasive imaging using a
     quantitative radiomics approach. Nat. Commun. 5(1), 4006 (2014)

 2. Afshar, P., Mohammadi, A., Plataniotis, K.N., Oikonomou, A., Benali, H.: From
     handcrafted to deep-learning-based cancer radiomics: challenges and opportunities.
     IEEE Signal Process. Maga. 36(4), 132–160 (2019)

 3. Antropova, N., Huynh, B.Q., Giger, M.L.: A deep feature fusion methodology for
     breast cancer diagnosis demonstrated on three imaging modality datasets. Med.
     Phys. 44(10), 5162–5171 (2017)

 4. Chen, S., et al.: Automatic scoring of multiple semantic attributes with multi-task
     feature leverage: a study on pulmonary nodules in CT images. IEEE Trans. Med.
     Imaging 36(3), 802–814 (2016)
Non-redundant Combination of Hand-Crafted and Deep Learning Radiomics  81

 5. Huynh, B.Q., Li, H., Giger, M.L.: Digital mammographic tumor classiﬁcation using
     transfer learning from deep convolutional neural networks. J. Med. Imaging 3(3),
     034501–034501 (2016)

 6. Isensee, F., et al.: nnU-Net: a self-conﬁguring method for deep learning-based
     biomedical image segmentation. Nat. Methods 18(2), 203–211 (2021)

 7. Khoury, T., Asombang, A.W., Berzin, T.M., Cohen, J., Pleskow, D.K., Mizrahi,
     M.: The clinical implications of fatty pancreas: a concise review. Digest. Dis. Sci.
     62, 2658–2667 (2017)

 8. Kim, H., Mnih, A.: Disentangling by factorising. In: International Conference on
     Machine Learning, pp. 2649–2658. PMLR (2018)

 9. Kingma, D.P., Welling, M.: Auto-encoding variational bayes. In: 2nd International
     Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR (2014)

10. Kumar, D., Wong, A., Clausi, D.A.: Lung nodule classiﬁcation using deep features
     in CT images. In: Conference on Computer and Robot Vision, pp. 133–138. IEEE
     (2015)

11. Kumar, V., et al.: Radiomics: the process and the challenges. Magn. Reson. Imaging
     30(9), 1234–1248 (2012)

12. Lambin, P., et al.: Radiomics: extracting more information from medical images
     using advanced feature analysis. Eur. J. Cancer 48(4), 441–446 (2012)

13. Lao, J., et al.: A deep learning-based radiomics model for prediction of survival in
     glioblastoma multiforme. Sci. Rep. 7(1), 10353 (2017)

14. Litjens, G., et al.: A survey on deep learning in medical image analysis. Med. Image
     Anal. 42, 60–88 (2017)

15. Liu, F., Xie, L., Xia, Y., Fishman, E., Yuille, A.: Joint shape representation and
     classiﬁcation for detecting PDAC. In: Suk, H.-I., Liu, M., Yan, P., Lian, C. (eds.)
     MLMI 2019. LNCS, vol. 11861, pp. 212–220. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.
     org/10.1007/978-3-030-32692-0 25

16. Liu, S., Xie, Y., Jirapatnakul, A., Reeves, A.P.: Pulmonary nodule classiﬁcation
     in lung cancer screening with three-dimensional convolutional neural networks. J.
     Med. Imaging 4(4), 041308–041308 (2017)

17. Majumder, S., Philip, N.A., Takahashi, N., Levy, M.J., Singh, V.P., Chari, S.T.:
     Fatty pancreas: should we be concerned? Pancreas 46(10), 1251 (2017)

18. Matsuda, Y.: Age-related morphological changes in the pancreas and their associ-
     ation with pancreatic carcinogenesis. Pathol. Int. 69(8), 450–462 (2019)

19. Miura, S., et al.: Focal parenchymal atrophy and fat replacement are clues for
     early diagnosis of pancreatic cancer with abnormalities of the main pancreatic
     duct. Tohoku J. Exp. Med. 252(1), 63–71 (2020)

20. Paul, R., et al.: Deep feature transfer learning in combination with traditional
     features predicts survival among patients with lung adenocarcinoma. Tomography
     2(4), 388–395 (2016)

21. Rav`ı, D., et al.: Deep learning for health informatics. J. Biomed. Health Inf. 21(1),
     4–21 (2016)

22. Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P., Brox, T.: U-net: convolutional networks for biomed-
     ical image segmentation. In: Navab, N., Hornegger, J., Wells, W.M., Frangi, A.F.
     (eds.) MICCAI 2015. LNCS, vol. 9351, pp. 234–241. Springer, Cham (2015).
     https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-24574-4 28

23. Shaﬁee, M.J., Chung, A.G., Khalvati, F., Haider, M.A., Wong, A.: Discovery
     radiomics via evolutionary deep radiomic sequencer discovery for pathologically
     proven lung cancer detection. J. Med. Imaging 4(4), 041305–041305 (2017)

24. Van Griethuysen, J.J., et al.: Computational radiomics system to decode the radio-
     graphic phenotype. Cancer Res. 77(21), e104–e107 (2017)
82  R. V´etil et al.

25. V´etil, R., et al.: Learning shape distributions from large databases of healthy
     organs: applications to zero-shot and few-shot abnormal pancreas detection. In:
     International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted
     Intervention, Part II, pp. 464–473. Springer, Heidelberg (2022). https://doi.org/
     10.1007/978-3-031-16434-7 45

26. Yamao, K., et al.: Partial pancreatic parenchymal atrophy is a new speciﬁc ﬁnding
     to diagnose small pancreatic cancer (≤ 10 mm) including carcinoma in situ: com-
     parison with localized benign main pancreatic duct stenosis patients. Diagnostics
     10(7), 445 (2020)
          Assessing the Performance of Deep
         Learning-Based Models for Prostate
      Cancer Segmentation Using Uncertainty

                               Scores

 Pablo Cesar Quihui-Rubio1(B), Daniel Flores-Araiza1, Gilberto Ochoa-Ruiz1,
                  Miguel Gonzalez-Mendoza1, and Christian Mata2,3

1 School of Engineering and Sciences, Tecnologico de Monterrey, Monterrey, Mexico
                       pabloqulhul@gmail.com, gilberto.ochoa@tec.mx

       2 Universitat Polit`ecnica de Catalunya, 08019 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain
  3 Pediatric Computational Imaging Research Group, Hospital Sant Joan de D´eu,

                         Esplugues de Llobregat, 08950 Catalonia, Spain

         Abstract. This study focuses on comparing deep learning methods for
         the segmentation and quantiﬁcation of uncertainty in prostate segmen-
         tation from MRI images. The aim is to improve the workﬂow of prostate
         cancer detection and diagnosis. Seven diﬀerent U-Net-based architec-
         tures, augmented with Monte-Carlo dropout, are evaluated for auto-
         matic segmentation of the central zone, peripheral zone, transition zone,
         and tumor, with uncertainty estimation. The top-performing model in
         this study is the Attention R2U-Net, achieving a mean Intersection over
         Union (IoU) of 76.3% ± 0.003 and Dice Similarity Coeﬃcient (DSC) of
         85% ± 0.003 for segmenting all zones. Additionally, Attention R2U-Net
         exhibits the lowest uncertainty values, particularly in the boundaries of
         the transition zone and tumor, when compared to the other models.

       Keywords: Segmentation · Uncertainty Quantiﬁcation · Prostate ·
       Cancer · Deep Learning · Computer Vision

1 Introduction

Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most common solid non-cutaneous cancer in men
and is among the most common causes of cancer-related deaths in 13 regions
of the world [1]. According to a recent overview, in 2020 prostate cancer was
the most frequently diagnosed cancer in males in 12 regions of the world, which
translates to around 1.41 million new cases [1]. However, when detected in early
stages, the survival rate for regional PCa is almost 100%. In contrast, the survival
rate when the cancer is spread to other parts of the body is of only 30% [2].

    Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is the most widely available non-invasive
and sensitive tool for detection, localization and staging of PCa, due to its high
resolution, excellent spontaneous contrast of soft tissues, and the possibility of

c The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
S. Ali et al. (Eds.): CaPTion 2023, LNCS 14295, pp. 83–93, 2023.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45350-2_7
84  P. C. Quihui-Rubio et al.

multi-planar and multi-parametric scanning [3]. MRI can be also be used for
PCa detection through the segmentation of Regions of Interest (ROI). The use
of image segmentation for PCa can help determine the localization and the
volume of the cancerous tissue [4]. Although prostate image segmentation is a
relatively old problem and some novel methods have been proposed, radiologists
still perform a manual segmentation of the prostate gland and regions of interest
(central zone, peripheral zone, and transition zone) [5]. This manual process is
time-consuming, and is sensitive to the specialist experience, resulting in a sig-
niﬁcant intra- and inter-specialist variability. Therefore, automating the process
of segmentation of prostate and gland regions of interest, may help save time
for practitioner radiologists and additionally can be used as a training tool for
others. One of the most popular architectures is the U-Net [6] model, which has
been the inspiration behind many recent works in the literature, such as Swin
U-Net [7], or R2U-Net [8]. While these models have yielded positive outcomes,
inconsistencies in performance have been observed in U-Net-based segmentation
due to the prostate’s anatomical structure. The boundaries between zones can
distort semantic features, leading to unreliable results. Furthermore, automatic
segmentation typically produces deterministic segmentation outcomes [9], and
there is insuﬃcient information available about the model’s conﬁdence level [10].
Despite their successes in many medical image analysis applications, DL algo-
rithms are usually not translated into real-world clinical scenarios because these
do not provide information about the uncertainty associated with their predic-
tion. This is problematic in the challenging context of pathological structures
segmentation (e.g., tumors) as even the top-performing methods are prone to
errors, and due to the lack of uncertainty information, it results impossible tell
apart diﬀerent sorts of erroneous predictions.

    Therefore, the overall segmentation workﬂow can be improved by providing
the uncertainties of the model that could allow end-users (e.g., clinicians) to
review and reﬁne cases with high uncertainty.

    In this work, we carry out a thorough assessment of automatic prostate
zone segmentation models using U-Net, Attention U-Net, Dense U-Net, Atten-
tion Dense U-Net, R2U-Net, Attention R2U-Net, and Swin U-Net architectures.
Additional to the segmentation task, we include the pixel-wise estimation of the
uncertainty, which can be done by obtaining a probability distribution of the
weights of the model. The zones evaluated in this work are the central zone
(CZ), the peripheral zone (PZ), transition zone (TZ), and, in the case of a dis-
ease, the tumor zone (TUM), unlike previous works which only evaluate CZ and
PZ [10].

    This paper has ﬁve sections including this introduction. Section 2 provides a
review about what has been done in previous works related to prostate segmen-
tation and uncertainty quantiﬁcation. Section 3 the dataset used is described,
followed by a description of the uncertainty quantiﬁcation procedure in this seg-
mentation task. In Sect. 4 the results of the experiments are discussed in detail.
Finally the conclusion of this work is presented in Sect. 6.
Assessing the Performance of Deep Learning-Based Models  85

2 Related Work

2.1 Deep Learning Segmentation

For segmentation, one of the best known models in the literature is the U-Net
architecture [6], which is the base for many other novel models. The work from
Zhu et al. [11] proposes a U-Net based network to segment the whole prostate
gland, obtaining encouraging results (DSC of 0.885). Moreover, this architecture
has served as the inspiration for some variants that enhance the performance of
the original model. One example is the work from Clark et al. [12] that presents
a model that combines concepts from the U-Net and the inception architectures.
Another example is the work presented by Oktay et al. [13], which proposes the
addition of attention gates inside the original U-Net model with the intention
of focusing on speciﬁc target structures. The addition of attention has served
as base for other architectures such as Attention Dense U-Net [14], Attention
R2U-Net [8], among others. Also, the introduction of Transformers in U-Net
architectures is a novel approach for segmentation task that had demonstrated
a good performance in biomedical images, such as Swin U-Net [7]. Despite this,
during the course of this study, no other research was found that segmented the
four zones discussed in this paper. Therefore, the number of studies that consider
a third zone (TZ) is still limited, this is more likely because the most common
datasets used are PROMISE-12 and the one from the PROSTATEx challenge,
with only CZ and PZ. In addition to that, providing a value that quantiﬁes the
uncertainty of the predictions can improve the overall workﬂow since it could
easily allow reﬁning uncertain cases by human experts.

2.2 Uncertainty Quantiﬁcation

The work from Theckel et al. [15] introduces a U-Net architecture with spa-
tial dropout to measure the uncertainty related to the segmentation of macular
degeneration, utilizing diﬀerent sizes of input data. The work from Suman et
al. [16] applied the uncertainty quantiﬁcation problem to retinal imaging using
a ResNet-based model, modiﬁed with standard random dropout layers before
every convolutional block. The work from Liu et al. [10] proposes an automatic
segmentation of the prostate zones and introduces a pixel-wise uncertainty esti-
mator using a ResNet50 backbone with attention and dropout layers.

3 Materials and Methods

3.1 Dataset

The dataset used in the present work was provided by Universidad Polit´ecnica de
Catalun˜a (UPC) in Barcelona, and Centre Hospitalaire de Dijon in France. The
dataset consists of three-dimensional T2-weighted fast spin-echo (TR/TE/ETL:
3600 ms/ 143 ms/109, slice thickness: 1.25 mm) images acquired with sub-
millimeter pixel resolution in an oblique axial plane. The number of patients
86  P. C. Quihui-Rubio et al.

in the dataset are 19, with a total of 205 images with their corresponding anno-
tation masks (of prostate zones) used as ground truth which were validated by
experts using a dedicated tool [17].

    The full dataset of 205 images, contains four diﬀerent combination of zones,
being: (CZ+PZ), (CZ+PZ+TZ), (CZ+PZ+Tumor), and (CZ+PZ+TZ+Tumor)
with 73, 68, 23, and 41 images, respectively. For the purpose of this work, the
dataset was divided in 85% for training and 15% for testing.

3.2 Uncertainty Estimation in Prostate Segmentation

Epistemic and aleatory uncertainties are the two major types of uncertainty
that can be quantiﬁed. Epistemic uncertainty captures the uncertainty related
to the models parameters caused by the lack of data, and, aleatory uncertainty
captures the noise inherent in the input data [10]. The sum of both uncertainties
forms the predictive uncertainty.

    In this work, the uncertainty of seven diﬀerent U-net-based models was mea-
sured in the test set. To approximate the inference of a model, Monte Carlo
(MC) dropout of a hidden layer was performed. MC Dropout is a technique
used in neural networks to incorporate uncertainty. It treats a network with
dropped-out neurons as Monte Carlo samples from all possible combinations,
approximating a Gaussian process [10,18]. The minimization of cross-entropy
loss is similar to minimizing the divergence of the predicted distribution [16].
Using MC Dropout, pixel-wise epistemic uncertainty can be computed as a vari-
ational Bayesian inference problem [16]. During predictions or testing, dropout
is also necessary. The main focus of this study is to investigate the predictive
uncertainty of prostate segmentation, which can be quantiﬁed using the entropy
of the predictive distribution [10].

3.3 Proposed Work

This work uses the original U-Net model and six U-Net extensions from the
literature: Attention U-Net [13], Dense U-Net [19], Attention Dense U-Net [14],
R2U-Net [8], Attention R2U-Net, and Swin U-Net [7]. These architectures had
demonstrated great performance segmenting biomedical images, even some of
them with public prostate’s datasets including CZ and PZ. However, unlike in
other works, we proposed to compare the performance segmenting the three
main zones of the prostate (CZ, PZ, and TZ) and a tumor tissue if it is present,
using the dataset described in Sect. 3.1.

    Before the ﬁnal training, an hyperparameter tunning proccess using a strati-
ﬁed 5-Fold validation with the training set was carried out using the base U-Net
model in order to obtain the optimal combination of data augmentation, learn-
ing rate and an approximation of epochs for training. The results demonstrated
that including data augmentation in the training did not increase signiﬁcantly
the performance of the models. Therefore we decided to use the original dataset
without data augmentation due to computational resources and time process-
ing. The previously mentioned models were trained for 145 epochs, using Adam
             Assessing the Performance of Deep Learning-Based Models  87

optimizer with a learning rate of 1e–4 and Categorical Cross-Entropy (CCE) loss
function. The performance was evaluated using Dice Score (DSC) and Intersec-
tion over Union (IoU) as the main metrics.

4 Results and Discussion

4.1 Quantitative Results
Table 1 shows a summary of evaluation results of the seven studied architectures,
in terms of two metrics (DSC and IoU) and loss value. In order to obtain these
results, the evaluation of each model was performed T = 50 times, and due to the
incorporation of MC Dropouts the results were diﬀerent each time. Therefore, the
average of all evaluations and prostate zones is reported with their corresponding
standard deviation.

Table 1. Comparison of model performance in segmentation metrics and loss value.
The metrics are denoted by upward (↑) or downward (↓) arrows, indicating the desired
direction of values. Bold values highlighted in green represent the best score achieved
among all models.

Model            IoU ↑  DSC ↑  Loss ↓

U-Net            0.676 ± 0.021 0.770 ± 0.021 0.0139 ± 0.0007

Attention U-Net  0.688 ± 0.011 0.781 ± 0.010 0.0132 ± 0.0003

Swin U-Net       0.725 ± 0.014 0.816 ± 0.014 0.0134 ± 0.0002

Dense U-Net      0.754 ± 0.004 0.846 ± 0.004 0.0146 ± 0.0003

Attention Dense U-Net 0.760 ± 0.006 0.847 ± 0.005 0.0154 ± 0.0004

R2U-Net          0.764 ± 0.002 0.850 ± 0.002 0.0119 ± 0.0001

Attention R2U-Net 0.763 ± 0.003 0.850 ± 0.003 0.0113 ± 0.0001

    Based on the metrics values, it can be seen that U-Net was the model with
worst performance. The use of attention to focus on the ROI helped to slightly
outperform the performance in segmentation tasks compared to the original U-
Net by around 1–2% for IoU and DSC.

    Moving to Swin U-Net, a novel architecture from the state-of-the-art that
uses Swin Transformers [7] achieved to increase the IoU and DSC values by
more than 7%, and lower loss value compared to U-Net.

    In the case of Dense U-Net, the performance of the model exceeds the previ-
ous three architectures, with IoU and DSC scores 11% and 10% better than the
base U-Net, respectively, with a loss value of 0.0146. As a plus, this model did
not need more computational resources or time during its training compared to
base U-Net. The next model consisted on the incorporation of attention modules
to Dense U-Net, which again outperformed all the previous models in the seg-
mentation metrics by 12% of IoU, and 10% of DSC compared to U-Net. However,
it achieved the higher loss value among all of 0.0154.
88  P. C. Quihui-Rubio et al.

    The last two architectures R2U-Net and Attention R2U-Net achieved very
similar results, but outperformed all the other models with values of 76.4% and
85% for IoU and DSC, respectively, and the lowest loss value of 0.0113 for the
Attention R2U-Net.

    As mentioned before, an uncertainty comparison between the architectures
was carried out per each prostate zone, as well as for the full image with its
corresponding standard deviation as it is shown in Fig. 1. The results shown in
this ﬁgure can help us to determine, in relation with previous table, which model
achieved to segment with more certain the prostate and its zones.

    In Fig. 1 it is observed that overall, the model that had the lowest mean
uncertainty segmenting all the images in the test set was R2U-Net with a mean
value of 0.048 ± 0.014 after 50 predictions, validating the results obtained in the
Table 1, being the most reliable and accurate model overall thanks to the use of
recurrent and residual units to get more context information.

    Furthermore, the Attention U-Net was the one with the highest uncertainty
overall with a value of 0.086 ± 0.023, having poor results in comparison to the
other models. U-Net and Swin U-Net obtained very similar results in most of the
prostate zones, although in the case of the TZ and Tumor, Swin U-Net achieved
lower uncertainty.

    Dense U-Net, Attention Dense U-Net and Attention R2U-Net succeeded
in obtaining smaller uncertainty mean values than U-Net (0.055 ± 0.018,
0.054 ± 0.018, and 0.052 ± 0.014, respectively). Although, TZ and Tumor are
the zones less present in the dataset, and where it looks to be more complex

Fig. 1. Comparison of Uncertainty per each class between DL Architectures. The mean
uncertainty could be identify with a black star inside each box, and the line represents
the median uncertainty value obtained, the best model is indicated with a red box for
each zone. (Color ﬁgure online)
Assessing the Performance of Deep Learning-Based Models  89

to segment, models like R2U-Net and Attention R2U-Net managed to achieved
a great segmentation performance and uncertainty values in average of those
zones in the test set. It is important to notice that both results are correlated.
These models managed to be adequately trained to perform the most accurate
segmentation task among the others, which can give more conﬁdence to radiol-
ogists when using a prostate segmentation tool based in this trained model.

4.2 Qualitative Results

In Fig. 2, a qualitative comparison is presented among the predictions of each
model using four diﬀerent example images from the dataset. The comparison
involves all possible combinations of zones. The ﬁrst two columns display the
original T2-MRI image of the prostate and its corresponding ground truth mask.
Subsequently, each column represents the average of probabilities obtained from
50 predictions for each model. It can be observed that the ﬁrst two zone com-
binations (Image A and B in Fig. 2) are relatively easier for most models, as
they produce segmentation that closely resemble the ground truth. However,
certain models such as U-Net and Swin U-Net appear to misclassify pixels as
TZ even when they are not present in the ground truth. Nevertheless, based on
the examples in the test set, the models have been trained eﬀectively to achieve
satisfactory segmentation performance on images containing CZ and PZ, and
some including TZ.

    Regarding the other two combinations that include the tumor, they posed
the most complex segmentation challenge with notable variation among models.
In Image C of Fig. 2, models like U-Net and Attention Dense U-Net incorrectly
classiﬁed a TZ region that was not identiﬁed in the ground truth. Meanwhile,
other models tended to excessively smooth the original segmentation, yielding a

Fig. 2. Comparison of average segmentation after 50 predictions for each model in all
the combinations of zones in the dataset.
90  P. C. Quihui-Rubio et al.

seemingly good but possibly inaccurate result. However, when visually compared
to the ground truth, the best segmentation in this example was achieved by R2U-
Net and Attention R2U-Net.

    For the last example, most models struggled to accurately segment the tumor.
Surprisingly, U-Net and Dense U-Net produced acceptable results, but Attention
R2U-Net demonstrated the best overall performance.

    Figure 3 illustrates the signiﬁcance of uncertainty by displaying the same four
examples as in the previous ﬁgure, along with corresponding uncertainty maps
represented as heat maps for each trained model. The temperature of the image
indicates the level of uncertainty, with higher temperatures indicating greater
uncertainty in those pixels, while lower temperatures indicate higher certainty
in the model’s pixel segmentation.

    The model with the highest uncertainty, particularly around the boundaries
of TZ and tumor, is U-Net, followed by Attention U-Net. This observation is evi-
dent. Furthermore, as previously mentioned, the ﬁrst two examples were easier
for the models, resulting in relatively low uncertainty across most of them. When
dealing with images containing tumors, the inclusion of dense blocks enhanced
model certainty. However, the utilization of recurrent residual blocks and atten-
tion modules surpassed other models, achieving acceptable predictions in the
test set with low uncertainty values, even in TZ and tumor tissues.

Fig. 3. Comparison of uncertainty maps after 50 predictions for each model with pre-
vious examples.

5 Application

In order to have a computer-aided tool which can be used for radiologists or clini-
cians, we proposed a Web App using Flask framework which we called ’ProstAI’,
and it was designed to have easier access to predict images using the best trained
Assessing the Performance of Deep Learning-Based Models  91

model with MC dropouts: Attention R2U-Net. This app predicts the segmenta-
tion mask, as well as the uncertainty map, which is very helpful to indicate the
experts which are the pixels where the model has higher uncertainty about their
segmentation, an example is shown in Fig. 4.

Fig. 4. Example of the analysis page of the ‘ProstAI’ app using a prostate image from
the Test set.

    This tool is proposed for experimental usage, further information about the
app and an example of usage can be found in: https://github.com/pabloquihui/
ProstAI.

6 Conclusion

This study makes a valuable contribution to prostate cancer segmentation by
introducing the segmentation of transition and tumor zones, along with the quan-
tiﬁcation of uncertainty, which has received limited attention in existing litera-
ture. The utilization of a private dataset validated by multiple experts, including
two radiologists and two oncologists, enhances the reliability and accuracy of the
ﬁndings. A comparison of seven diﬀerent deep learning models was conducted
using segmentation metrics, uncertainty scores, and visual inspection. Among
these models, Attention R2U-Net emerged as the top-performing approach in
both analyses. The inclusion of recurrent residual blocks in U-Net (R2U-Net)
notably enhanced the segmentation results by capturing additional contextual
information. Furthermore, Attention R2U-Net demonstrated exceptional pro-
ﬁciency in segmenting all prostate zones, exhibiting superior performance in
metrics and yielding lower average uncertainty estimated using the MC method.
This highlights the positive impact of attention modules on improving segmen-
tation and, more signiﬁcantly, reducing uncertainty in predictions by focusing
on the ROI.
92  P. C. Quihui-Rubio et al.

    Moreover, a web app has been developed with a focus on experimental use for
radiologists. This app provides more accurate, consistent, and faster results and
displays the uncertainty map for each predicted image. The uncertainty map
provides a visual representation of the pixels in which the model is uncertain
about the segmentation, giving radiologists a better idea of the areas that require
further analysis.

Acknowledgments. The authors wish to acknowledge the Mexican Council for Sci-
ence and Technology (CONACYT) for the support in terms of postgraduate scholar-
ships in this project, and the Data Science Hub at Tecnologico de Monterrey for their
support on this project. This work has been supported by Azure Sponsorship credits
granted by Microsoft’s AI for Good Research Lab through the AI for Health program.
The authors would also like to thank the ﬁnancial support from Tecnologico de Mon-
terrey through the “Challenge-Based Research Funding Program 2022”. Project ID #
E120 - EIC-GI06 - B-T3 - D.

References

 1. Sung, H., et al.: Global cancer statistics 2020: globocan estimates of incidence and
     mortality worldwide for 36 cancers in 185 countries. CA Cancer J. Clin. 71(3),
     209–249 (2021)

 2. AstraZeneca. A personalized approach in prostate cancer (2020). https://www.
     astrazeneca.com/our-therapy-areas/oncology/prostate-cancer.html. Accessed 17
     Oct 2021

 3. Chen, M., et al.: Prostate cancer detection: comparison of t2-weighted imaging,
     diﬀusion-weighted imaging, proton magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging, and
     the three techniques combined. Acta Radiologica 49(5), 602–610 (2008)

 4. Haralick, R., Shapiro, L.: Image segmentation techniques. Comput. Vision Graph.
     Image Process. 29(1), 100–132 (1985)

 5. Aldoj, N., Biavati, F., Michallek, F., Stober, S., Dewey, M.: Automatic prostate
     and prostate zones segmentation of magnetic resonance images using densenet-like
     u-net. Sci. Rep. 10, 08 (2020)

 6. Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P., Brox, T.: U-net: convolutional networks for biomed-
     ical image segmentation. In: Navab, N., Hornegger, J., Wells, W.M., Frangi, A.F.
     (eds.) MICCAI 2015. LNCS, vol. 9351, pp. 234–241. Springer, Cham (2015).
     https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-24574-4 28

 7. Cao, H., et al.: Swin-unet: unet-like pure transformer for medical image segmenta-
     tion. In: Karlinsky, L., Michaeli, T., Nishino, K. (eds.) Computer Vision - ECCV
     2022 Workshops, pp. 205–218 (2023). Springer, Cham (2022). https://doi.org/10.
     1007/978-3-031-25066-8 9

 8. Alom, M.Z., Hasan, M., Yakopcic, C., Taha, T.M., Asari, V.K.: Recurrent residual
     convolutional neural network based on u-net (r2u-net) for medical image segmen-
     tation. CoRR, abs/1802.06955 (2018)

 9. Basar, S., Ali, M., Ochoa-Ruiz, G., Zareei, M., Waheed, A., Adnan, A.: Unsuper-
     vised color image segmentation: a case of rgb histogram based k-means clustering
     initialization. PLOS ONE 15(10), 1–21 (2020)

10. Liu, Y., et al.: Exploring uncertainty measures in bayesian deep attentive neural
     networks for prostate zonal segmentation. IEEE Access 8, 151817–151828 (2020)
Assessing the Performance of Deep Learning-Based Models  93

11. Zhu, Q., Du, B., Turkbey, B., Choyke, P.L., Yan, P.: Deeply-supervised CNN for
     prostate segmentation. CoRR, abs/1703.07523 (2017)

12. Clark, T., Wong, A., Haider, M., Khalvati, F.: Fully deep convolutional neural
     networks for segmentation of the prostate gland in diﬀusion-weighted mr images,
     pp. 97–104 (2017)

13. Oktay, O., et al.: Attention u-net: learning where to look for the pancreas (2018)
14. Li, S., Dong, M., Du, G., Mu, X.: Attention dense-u-net for automatic breast mass

     segmentation in digital mammogram. IEEE Access 7, 59037–59047 (2019)
15. Joy, T.T., Sedai, S., Garnavi, R.: Analyzing epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty

     for drusen segmentation in optical coherence tomography images (2021)
16. Sedai, S., Antony, B., Mahapatra, D., Garnavi, R.: Joint segmentation and uncer-

     tainty visualization of retinal layers in optical coherence tomography images using
     bayesian deep learning (2018)
17. Mata, C., Munuera, J., Lalande, A., Ochoa-Ruiz, G., Benitez, R.: Medicalseg: a
     medical gui application for image segmentation management. Algorithms 15(06),
     200 (2022)
18. Gal, Y., Ghahramani, Z.: Dropout as a bayesian approximation: representing model
     uncertainty in deep learning. In: International Conference on Machine Learning,
     pp. 1050–1059. PMLR (2016)
19. Wu, Y., Wu, J., Jin, S., Cao, L., Jin, G.: Dense-u-net: dense encoder-decoder
     network for holographic imaging of 3d particle ﬁelds. Opt. Commun. 493, 126970
     (2021)
       MoSID: Modality-Speciﬁc Information
      Disentanglement from Multi-parametric

        MRI for Breast Tumor Segmentation

  Jiadong Zhang1, Qianqian Chen1,2, Luping Zhou3, Zhiming Cui1, Fei Gao1,
               Zhenhui Li4, Qianjin Feng2, and Dinggang Shen1,5,6(B)

               1 School of Biomedical Engineering, ShanghaiTech University,
                                         Shanghai 201210, China

                                     dgshen@shanghaitech.edu.cn
             2 School of Biomedical Engineering, Southern Medical University,

                               Guangzhou 510515, Guangdong, China
                       3 School of Electrical and Information Engineering,
                   The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
    4 Department of Radiology, The Third Aﬃliated Hospital of Kunming Medical

                                 University, Kunming 650118, China
      5 Shanghai United Imaging Intelligence Co., Ltd., Shanghai 200230, China

         6 Shanghai Clinical Research and Trial Center, Shanghai 200052, China

         Abstract. Breast cancer is a major health issue, causing millions of
         deaths each year worldwide. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is an
         eﬀective tool for detecting and diagnosing breast tumors, with vari-
         ous MRI sequences providing comprehensive information on tumor mor-
         phology. However, existing methods for segmenting tumors from multi-
         parametric MRI have limitations, including the lack of considering inter-
         modality relationships and exploring task-informative modalities. To
         address these limitations, we propose the Modality-Speciﬁc Information
         Disentanglement (MoSID) framework, which extracts both intra- and
         inter-modality attention maps as prior knowledge to guide tumor seg-
         mentation from multi-parametric MRI. This is achieved by disentangling
         modality-speciﬁc information that provides complementary clues to the
         segmentation task and generating modality-speciﬁc attention maps in a
         synthesis manner. The modality-speciﬁc attention maps are further used
         to guide modality selection and inter-modality evaluation. Experiment
         results on a large breast dataset show that the MoSID achieves supe-
         rior performance over other state-of-the-art multi-modality segmentation
         methods, and works reasonably well even with missing modalities.

       Keywords: Breast tumor · Segmentation · Disentanglement

1 Introduction

Breast cancer is the most common type of malignant neoplasm aﬀecting women
[9,12]. Early detection and timely treatment can greatly increase survival rate.

J. Zhang and Q. Chen–Equal Contribution.

c The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
S. Ali et al. (Eds.): CaPTion 2023, LNCS 14295, pp. 94–104, 2023.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45350-2_8
MoSID: Breast Tumor Segmentation from Multi-parametric MRI  95

Fig. 1. Multi-parametric breast MR images from three typical cases, including DCE
images (pre-contrast and post-contrast), T2w images, and ADC images.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is an excellent modality for lesion detec-
tion and diagnosis, due to its sensitiveness to tumors. In clinics, multiple MRI
sequences, e.g., dynamic-contrast enhanced MRI (DCE), T2-weighted image
(T2w), and apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient (ADC), provide comprehensive infor-
mation to detect and diagnose tumors. In Fig. 1, compared to the DCE image
without contrast agent injection (i.e., pre-contrast image), the tumor region is
enhanced and exhibits a higher intensity distribution after contrast agent injec-
tion (i.e., post-contrast image). Nonetheless, tumor segmentation from multiple
MRI sequences is still challenging. In most cases, tumor regions show higher sig-
nal in T2w images and lower signal in ADC images (1st case in Fig. 1). However,
some tumors (especially those that are large and have a triple negative molecu-
lar type) may contain slime or calciﬁcation, resulting in unusual signal intensity
distribution in T2w and ADC images (2nd and 3rd cases in Fig. 1). Therefore,
these characteristics pose a great challenge for accurately and automatically
segmenting breast tumors from multi-parametric MRI.

    Many multi-modality segmentation methods typically focus on extracting
and combining task-speciﬁc information from each modality, but usually over-
look the inter-relationships between diﬀerent modalities. This could limit their
ability to fully exploit the complementary information available across multiple
modalities and may lead to suboptimal segmentation results. Recently, several
disentanglement-based methods have been proposed to improve segmentation
performance, by extracting the complementary and additional information of
individual modality, i.e., modality-speciﬁc information. However, the disentan-
glement is usually conducted in the feature space through an attention module
and lacks of interpretability. Moreover, all of these methods fail to address the
questions [5]: (1) Are all modalities for each patient informative for the seg-
mentation task? (2) Will the extracted modality-speciﬁc information beneﬁt or
damage the segmentation task?

    To address these questions, we propose the Modality-Speciﬁc Information
Disentanglement (MoSID) framework for tumor segmentation from multiple
MRI sequences. Based on clinical diagnosis experience, we use the DCE image
as the main modality, and T2w and ADC images as supplementary modalities.
96  J. Zhang et al.

We aim to extract the speciﬁc and complementary information provided by sup-
plementary modalities based on the main modality as prior knowledge in order
to further guide modality selection and evaluation with better segmentation
performance. For the main modality (DCE), the modality-speciﬁc information
is deﬁned as all information obtained from this source. For the supplementary
modalities (T2w and ADC), the modality-speciﬁc information is the additional
information provided by a supplementary modality, which is not shared with
the main modality and provides complementary clues about the subject. In the
ﬁrst and second step, our goal is to generate modality-speciﬁc attention maps by
disentangling task-oriented, modality-speciﬁc information from a perspective of
information theory. Speciﬁcally, we synthesize fake T2w and ADC images by fully
leveraging the information from DCE image, representing the shared information
between T2w/ADC and DCE. Together with their real T2w/ADC counterparts
and DCE, four input cases are sent through a segmentation network to gener-
ate intermediate segmentation masks. By comparing the segmentation results
of the four cases, we could obtain the modality-speciﬁc attention maps. The
well-generated modality-speciﬁc attention maps are then used to guide modality
selection (question 1) and inter-modality voxel-wise evaluation (question 2) in
the third step, with modality trusty gating and modality-speciﬁc attention mod-
ules. Experimental results demonstrate that the disentangled modality-speciﬁc
attention maps play a crucial role, and obtain signiﬁcant improvements com-
pared to other state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods. Furthermore, our proposed
MoSID framework also performs well in the absence of T2w or ADC modality,
indicating framework’s great robustness.

2 Methodology

The proposed MoSID framework focuses on utilizing DCE images, which have
high resolution and better tissue contrast, as the main modality for tumor
segmentation. ADC and T2w images are used as supplementary modalities to
extract modality-speciﬁc attention to guide the segmentation process. As shown
in Fig. 2, the MoSID framework consists of three steps, each of which will be
described in detail below.

2.1 Step 1: Image Synthesis

The ﬁrst step of our proposed MoSID method involves synthesizing fake ADC
and T2w images from the DCE images. The aim of this step is to provide the
same task-related information as the DCE images, but from a diﬀerent modal-
ity view. To accomplish this, we design two synthesis networks, G1 and G2, to
map the DCE images to ADC and T2w spaces, respectively. The synthesized
ADC images xˆADC and T2w images xˆT 2w retain the structural information
from the real DCE images xDCE. The information in the images can be repre-
sented using I(·). Thus, we have I(xˆADC ) = I(G1(xDCE)) ≤ I(xDCE) for the
synthesized ADC images, indicating that they contain nearly the same infor-
mation as the DCE images. The same holds true for the T2w images, with
MoSID: Breast Tumor Segmentation from Multi-parametric MRI  97

Fig. 2. An overview of the proposed MoSID framework, including image synthesis,
modality-speciﬁc information disentanglement and breast tumor segmentation. The
detailed structure of modality speciﬁc attention and modality trusty gating modules
are also illustrated.

I(xˆT 2w) = I(G1(xDCE)) ≤ I(xDCE). By comparing the real images (i.e., xADC
and xT 2w) with the synthesized images (i.e., xˆADC and xˆT 2w), we can easily
observe the agreement and diﬀerences among the three modalities at the image
level.

2.2 Step 2: Modality-Speciﬁc Information Disentanglement

In this step, our goal is to ﬁnd the modality-speciﬁc information by comparing
synthesized images with real images. We design an information extractor, G3, to
extract task-oriented attention for the downstream segmentation task. Initially,
we input the real images {xDCE, xADC , xT 2w} into the network and obtain the
segmentation probability p1, which contains information from all modalities.
Next, we input diﬀerent combinations of real and synthesized images into the
network and obtain segmentation probability maps p2, p3, and p4. For example,
when we input {xDCE, xˆADC , xT 2w} into the network, the task-oriented informa-
tion of p2 comes from xDCE and xT 2w because xˆADC is synthesized from xDCE.
The same also holds for p3 with input {xDCE, xADC , xˆT 2w} (information from
xDCE and xADC ) and p4 with input {xDCE, xˆADC , xˆT 2w} (information from
xDCE). By subtracting the probability maps, we calculate the speciﬁc informa-
tion from T2w (TT 2w) and ADC (TADC ) that diﬀers from the main modality
DCE: TT 2w = p1 − p3 and TADC = p1 − p2. Since DCE is the main modality with
the most important information, we can obtain modality information from the
DCE modality with TDCE = p4. The speciﬁc information from each modality
provides modality trustworthiness and inter-modality attention, which can then
be used to guide the downstream tumor segmentation.
98        J. Zhang et al.

2.3 Step 3: Breast Tumor Segmentation

In this step, we enhance the exploration of intra- and inter-modality relationships
to improve tumor segmentation performance using well-presented modality-
speciﬁc attentions. To achieve this, we employ three encoders with the same
structure for each modality, and we utilize the Modality Speciﬁc Attention
(MSA) module and the Modality Trusty Gating (MTG) module to eﬀectively
fuse the multi-modality information. This information is then input into the
decoder to produce the ﬁnal prediction of tumor probability, as shown in Fig. 2.

Modality Speciﬁc Attention (Intra-Modality). In order to better extract

informative features and avoid misleading features within each modality, we

design the Modality Speciﬁc Attention (MSA) module, which is used within each

encoder, with a similar structure of the self-attention module in the Attention

U-Net [8]. However, our MSA module diﬀers in using well-presented modality

speciﬁc information learned in a previous step, instead of learning it from the

network automatically, resulting in better interpretability and increased atten-

tion on uncertain regions.

    Given the original images xm ∈ R1×L×W ×H and the learned modality-
speciﬁc information Tm ∈ R1×L×W ×H , where m ∈ [DCE, T 2w, ADC] denotes

the modality and L, W, H denote length, width, and height of the input patches,

we  ﬁrst  calculate  multiple      feature   maps  fmi   ∈  RC×     L  ×    W   ×    H   at diﬀerent
                                                                 2i−1     2i−1     2i−1

down-sampled scales within each encoder. Here, i ∈ [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] and C rep-

resents the channel number of each feature map. Next, we down-sample the

information  Tm     to    obtain   multiple  maps  tm i  ∈  RC×     L  ×    W   ×    H   at diﬀerent
                                                                 2i−1     2i−1     2i−1

scales, and then use the MSA module to calculate the correlation attention maps

g ∈ R iC×     L  ×    W   ×    H   using the equation:
           2i−1     2i−1     2i−1
  m

                          gmi = σ(γ(δ(φtm i + ϕfmi + bφ + bϕ) + bδ),                     (1)

where φ, ϕ, δ are convolution kernel weights, as shown in Fig. 2, and bφ, bϕ, bδ
are corresponding biases. γ and σ are ReLU and Sigmoid activation func-

tions, respectively. The correlation attention maps more accurately capture the

modality-speciﬁc information for tumor region localization compared to tim,
                                                               L       W        H
and we can obtain localized features oim           ∈ RC×    2i−1  ×  2i−1  ×  2i−1  by calculating

oim = fmi × gmi as MSA output.

Modality Trusty Gating (Inter-Modality). As discussed previously, some
modalities have abnormal signal intensities that can aﬀect the segmentation
accuracy. To overcome this challenge, we design a Modality Trusty Gating
(MTG) module that could distinguish task-related information by preserving
positive features and removing negative features. The MTG module calculates
the conﬁdence scores between the main modality (DCE) and supplementary
modalities (T2w and ADC) to evaluate the contribution of each modality to the
segmentation task.
MoSID: Breast Tumor Segmentation from Multi-parametric MRI  99

    To calculate the conﬁdence scores, we need the feature maps from the encoder
fmi and the down-sampled modality-speciﬁc attention map tim. The conﬁdence
score for the T2w modality (siT 2w) is calculated as follows:

siT 2w = η(ξ(hiT 2w) :: ξ(hTi 2w :: hiDCE :: hiADC )),      (2)

where ξ represents average pooling, :: represents feature concatenation, and η
represents a series of operations including linear projection, ReLU, and Sigmoid
activation functions, as illustrated in Fig. 2. Similarly, the conﬁdence score for
the ADC modality (siADC ) is calculated as:

siADC = η(ξ(hiADC ) :: ξ(hTi 2w :: hiDCE :: hiADC )).       (3)

These conﬁdence scores are then used to combine the supplementary modality
features with the main modality features, using the following equation:

zi = κ(υ(hiT 2w :: hDi CE :: hAi DC ) + siT 2w × hiT 2w + siADC × hiADC ), (4)

where κ and υ are two convolution operators. The ﬁnal multi-modality features
fed into the decoder have trusty information and produce a ﬁnal robust segmen-
tation prediction.

3 Experiments and Results

3.1 Dataset and Implementation Details

In this study, a large dataset consisting of 415 cases collected from 413 patients
are used. Each case includes two DCE images (pre- and post-contrast image),
one T2w image, and one ADC image. To reduce the impact of patient motion
during the scan, both T2w and ADC images are well-aligned with DCE images
using the ANTs algorithm [1]. Experienced radiologists manually annotate breast
tumors in the DCE images, which served as the ground truth. In the data pre-
processing stage, all images are resampled to a common space with a voxel size of
1×1×1 mm3 and normalized to the range of [0, 1] using min-max normalization.
The data are randomly split into 249 cases for training (60%), 83 cases for valida-
tion (20%), and the remaining 83 cases for testing (20%). To accommodate GPU
memory limitations, large-scale 3D patches with a voxel size of 128×128×96 are
extracted for training. Random data augmentation techniques such as ﬂipping
and rotation are applied to reduce the risk of overﬁtting. To evaluate the tumor
segmentation performance, three commonly used metrics were adopted, includ-
ing Dice similarity coeﬃcient (DSC, 0%–100%), Sensitivity (SEN, 0%–100%),
and Average surface distance (ASD, mm).

    In our proposed framework, we have two synthesis networks (for synthesiz-
ing DCE to T2w and DCE to ADC), a modality-speciﬁc information extraction
network, and a segmentation network. The two synthesis networks and the infor-
mation extraction network are based on RU-Net, which includes four down/up-
sampling operations. The experiments are conducted on PyTorch platform using
100 J. Zhang et al.

Table 1. Breast tumor segmentation performance in terms of DSC, SEN and ASD.

Method               Publication DSC (%) ↑ SEN (%) ↑ ASD (mm) ↓

Robust-Mseg [2] MICCAI’19 77.70 ± 4.57 75.12 ± 4.91 7.10 ± 4.72

Cross-Model [7] MICCAI’19 79.72 ± 4.08 76.46 ± 4.77 5.27 ± 4.01

CSAD [11]            JBHI’21 72.92 ± 3.97 72.99 ± 5.05 8.89 ± 3.02

RFNet [3]            ICCV’21 74.02 ± 5.19 68.87 ± 5.62 6.14 ± 4.22

MAML [14]            MICCAI’21 80.34 ± 3.42 83.03 ± 3.57 6.36 ± 2.89

MMEF-UNet [6] MICCAI’22 79.89 ± 3.23 79.78 ± 3.73 6.79 ± 2.75

NestedFormer [10] MICCAI’22 79.95 ± 3.49 83.62 ± 3.62 7.44 ± 2.79

mmFormer [13] MICCAI’22 79.90 ± 3.20 83.64 ± 2.89 7.26 ± 2.90

MoSID (Ours) CaPTion’23 83.98 ± 2.52 82.92 ± 3.41 2.66 ± 1.38

two NVIDIA TESLA V100 GPUs with 32GB of memory. The initial learning
rate for the synthesis networks is set at 0.0002 and decreases by half every 50
epochs. For the segmentation network, we adopt a RU-Net model with three
encoders for each modality as the baseline. The initial learning rate is set at
0.005 and decreased by half every 50 epochs. More details can be viewed in the
released code repository.

3.2 Segmentation Performance Analysis

Comparison with SOTA Multi-modal Segmentation Methods. We have
compared our proposed MoSID framework with several SOTA methods for multi-
modal tumor segmentation, including Robust-Mseg [2], Cross-Model [7], CSAD
[11], RFNet [3], MAML [14], MMEF-UNet [6], NestedFormer [10] and mmFormer
[13]. It is worth noting that Cross-Model is speciﬁcally developed for breast
tumor segmentation, while MAML is designed for liver tumor segmentation,
and CSAD is developed for prostate tumor segmentation. The other methods
are all developed for multi-modal brain tumor segmentation.

    As shown in Table 1, the proposed MoSID method surpasses the performance
of other methods. In comparison to latent feature fusion techniques, such as
[2,3,7,11], MoSID demonstrates a better ability to distinguish between trust-
worthy and uncertain regions in each modality, which results in improved seg-
mentation performance. Speciﬁcally, MoSID achieves 4.2% increase in DSC and
2.6 mm reduction in ASD compared to the Cross-Model method. The proposed
MoSID method also oﬀers superior performance compared to both late fusion
methods (such as MAML and MMEF-UNet) and transformer-based fusion meth-
ods (such as mmFormer and NestedFormer). While late fusion methods use sta-
tistical convolution kernels to fuse modalities, they do not take into account the
diﬀerences between patients. In contrast, MoSID dynamically adjusts modality
fusion based on global-local modality trust, using learned modality-speciﬁc infor-
mation attention with MSA and MTG modules. As a result, it achieves better
                MoSID: Breast Tumor Segmentation from Multi-parametric MRI 101

Fig. 3. Visual comparison of tumor segmentation results by diﬀerent methods on two
typical cases. For each case, both left and right breast are illustrated. The red contours
are the ground-truth annotations, and the green contours are the predictions from each
methods. (Color ﬁgure online)

segmentation performance. Speciﬁcally, compared to MAML, MoSID results in
3.6% increase in DSC and 3.7 mm decrease in ASD. Similarly, compared with
transformer-based methods, MoSID is not susceptible to misleading information
in certain modalities of certain patients, leading to overall better segmentation
performance.

    The visualization results further support the superiority of MoSID. As seen
in Fig. 3, each column displays the original DCE-MRI and the corresponding
segmentation results (highlighted by orange and blue boxes) for each method.
The red contour represents the ground-truth annotation and the green contour
shows the segmentation result from each method, which are overlapped for bet-
ter visualization. It is evident that MoSID produces segmentation results that
are more in line with the ground-truth annotation than the other methods.
Additionally, in regions where the DCE-MRI displays misleading enhancement,
MoSID produces correct results without over-segmentation, potentially resulting
in signiﬁcant improvement for ASD metric, demonstrating its improved perfor-
mance.

    In our method, we separate the shared and speciﬁc information of each
modality for ﬁne-grained segmentation, similar to uncertainty-based segmen-
tation methods that use Gaussian approximations to detect uncertain regions.
For instance, the Dropout Bayesian Network (DBNet [4]) approximates Gaussian
processes using diﬀerent types of dropout during inference. However, DBNet still
falls short in eﬀectively exploring the complex modality information, which may
result in misleading information and unsatisfactory performance. Figure 4(a)
overlays the probability map from our method and DBNet for each modality. For
DCE images, our method identiﬁes high uncertainty values on the right breast,
whereas DBNet only contains a few regions with lower uncertainty. Further-
more, DBNet does not provide modality-speciﬁc information for T2w and ADC
102 J. Zhang et al.

       DCE           T2w  ADC

Ours

DBNet

                     (a)       (b)

Fig. 4. (a) Segmentation attention maps from our methods (the ﬁrst row) and DBNet
(the second row) for each modality. (b) Segmentation performance of our method and
DBNet in terms of DSC and ASD.

Table 2. Segmentation performance of ablation study in terms of DSC, SEN and ASD.

       Baseline MSA MTG DSC (%) ↑ SEN (%) ↑ ASD (mm) ↓
                                       76.96 ± 4.74 75.45 ± 5.16 8.72 ± 7.15
                                       82.06 ± 3.65 82.91 ± 3.96 3.28 ± 1.57
                                       81.49 ± 3.16 82.10 ± 3.69 3.95 ± 1.94
                                       83.98 ± 2.52 82.92 ± 3.41 2.66 ± 1.38

images, which are only distributed on small boundary regions. In contrast, our
method separates the modality-speciﬁc information for T2w and ADC images
as attention maps for improved segmentation, resulting in better performance,
as shown in Fig. 4(b).

Ablation Studies. To further evaluate the impact of each component in the
framework, we conduct a series of ablation studies, as summarized in Table 2. The
framework’s performance is improved by the specially designed Modality Spatial
Attention (MSA) module, which eﬀectively leverages modality-speciﬁc spatial
information, resulting in 5.1% improvement in DSC. The Modality Trusty Gat-
ing (MTG) module removes misleading information in a global manner, enabling
the network to dynamically adapt to each case. This results in a signiﬁcant
improvement in segmentation performance, such as 4.5% increase in DSC. Our
full method, MoSID (Baseline + MSA + MTG), achieves the best results, with
7.0%, 7.5%, and 6.1 mm improvement in DSC, SEN, and ASD metrics, respec-
tively.

Missing Modality Segmentation. We would like to emphasize that missing
modality scenario for breast cancer is relatively rare, as DCE scans are required
for clinical diagnosis and ADC/T2w scans only take a few additional minutes to
                MoSID: Breast Tumor Segmentation from Multi-parametric MRI 103

collect. Nevertheless, we also demonstrate the capability of MoSID for missing
modality segmentation, which can be applied to other multi-modality segmen-
tation tasks, such as brain tumor segmentation. We use synthesized images to
replace real images for breast tumor segmentation.

    When only the DCE modality is available, the DSC and ASD are 70.68%
and 7.57 mm respectively. On the other hand, when the ADC (T2w) modality
is missing, the DSC and ASD are 81.42% (74.11%) and 4.77 mm (4.18 mm)
respectively. These results highlight the importance of using multiple modalities
for breast tumor segmentation. Additionally, our MoSID is robust in handling
missing modality scenario and achieves satisfactory performance.

4 Conclusion

The paper introduces a new approach for breast tumor segmentation in multi-
parametric MRI scans, called as the MoSID framework. This framework focuses
on disentangling task-speciﬁc information for each imaging modality, which is
then utilized to guide the segmentation process with the help of modality spe-
ciﬁc attention and modality trusty gating modules. The results of the exper-
iments conducted on a comprehensive dataset of multi-parametric MRI scans
indicate that the MoSID framework signiﬁcantly outperforms state-of-the-art
multi-modality segmentation methods. The eﬀective use of the disentangled
modality-speciﬁc attention maps play a crucial role and can be extended to
other tumor segmentation tasks.

Acknowledgments. This work was supported in part by The Key R&D Program
of Guangdong Province, China (grant number 2021B0101420006), National Natural
Science Foundation of China (grant number 62131015), and Science and Technology
Commission of Shanghai Municipality (STCSM) (grant number 21010502600).

References

 1. Avants, B.B., Tustison, N.J., Song, G., Cook, P.A., Klein, A., Gee, J.C.: A repro-
     ducible evaluation of ants similarity metric performance in brain image registration.
     Neuroimage 54(3), 2033–2044 (2011)

 2. Chen, C., Dou, Q., Jin, Y., Chen, H., Qin, J., Heng, P.-A.: Robust multimodal
     brain tumor segmentation via feature disentanglement and gated fusion. In: Shen,
     D., et al. (eds.) MICCAI 2019. LNCS, vol. 11766, pp. 447–456. Springer, Cham
     (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-32248-9 50

 3. Ding, Y., Yu, X., Yang, Y.: Rfnet: region-aware fusion network for incomplete
     multi-modal brain tumor segmentation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Inter-
     national Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 3975–3984 (2021)

 4. Gal, Y., Ghahramani, Z.: Dropout as a bayesian approximation: representing model
     uncertainty in deep learning. In: International Conference on Machine Learning,
     pp. 1050–1059. PMLR (2016)

 5. Han, Z., Yang, F., Huang, J., Zhang, C., Yao, J.: Multimodal dynamics: dynamical
     fusion for trustworthy multimodal classiﬁcation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
     Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 20707–20717 (2022)
104 J. Zhang et al.

 6. Huang, L., Denoeux, T., Vera, P., Ruan, S.: Evidence fusion with contextual dis-
     counting for multi-modality medical image segmentation. In: International Con-
     ference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, pp.
     401–411. Springer, Heidelberg (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-16443-
     9 39

 7. Li, C., Sun, H., Liu, Z., Wang, M., Zheng, H., Wang, S.: Learning cross-modal deep
     representations for multi-modal MR image segmentation. In: Shen, D., et al. (eds.)
     MICCAI 2019. LNCS, vol. 11765, pp. 57–65. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.
     org/10.1007/978-3-030-32245-8 7

 8. Oktay, O., et al.: Attention u-net: learning where to look for the pancreas. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:1804.03999 (2018)

 9. Venturelli, S., Leischner, C., Helling, T., Renner, O., Burkard, M., Marongiu, L.:
     Minerals and cancer: overview of the possible diagnostic value. Cancers 14(5), 1256
     (2022)

10. Xing, Z., Yu, L., Wan, L., Han, T., Zhu, L.: Nestedformer: nested modality-aware
     transformer for brain tumor segmentation. In: International Conference on Medi-
     cal Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, pp. 140–150. Springer,
     Heidelberg (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-16443-9 14

11. Zhang, G., et al.: Cross-modal prostate cancer segmentation via self-attention dis-
     tillation. IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inf. 26, 5298–5309 (2021)

12. Zhang, J., et al.: A robust and eﬃcient AI assistant for breast tumor segmentation
     from DCE-MRI via a spatial-temporal framework. Patterns 4(9), 1–14 (2023)

13. Zhang, Y., et al.: mmformer: multimodal medical transformer for incomplete mul-
     timodal learning of brain tumor segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.02425
     (2022)

14. Zhang, Y., et al.: Modality-aware mutual learning for multi-modal medical image
     segmentation. In: de Bruijne, M., et al. (eds.) MICCAI 2021. LNCS, vol. 12901, pp.
     589–599. Springer, Cham (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-87193-2 56
Cancer/Early cancer Surveillance
           Colonoscopy Coverage Revisited:
      Identifying Scanning Gaps in Real-Time

     George Leifman(B), Idan Kligvasser, Roman Goldenberg, Ehud Rivlin,
                                        and Michael Elad

                                      Verily Research, Haifa, Israel
                                         gleifman@google.com

         Abstract. Colonoscopy is the most widely used medical technique for
         preventing Colorectal Cancer, by detecting and removing polyps before
         they become malignant. Recent studies show that around 25% of the
         existing polyps are routinely missed. While some of these do appear in
         the endoscopist’s ﬁeld of view, others are missed due to a partial coverage
         of the colon. The task of detecting and marking unseen regions of the
         colon has been addressed in recent work, where the common approach
         is based on dense 3D reconstruction, which proves to be challenging
         due to lack of 3D ground truth and periods with poor visual content.
         In this paper we propose a novel and complementary method to detect
         deﬁcient local coverage in real-time for video segments where a reliable
         3D reconstruction is impossible. Our method aims to identify skips along
         the colon caused by a drifted position of the endoscope during poor
         visibility time intervals. The proposed solution consists of two phases.
         During the ﬁrst, time segments with good visibility of the colon and
         gaps between them are identiﬁed. During the second phase, a trained
         model operates on each gap, answering the question: “Do you observe
         the same scene before and after the gap?” If the answer is negative, the
         endoscopist is alerted and can be directed to the appropriate area in real-
         time. The second phase model is trained using a contrastive loss based
         on the auto-generated examples. Our method evaluation on a dataset of
         250 procedures annotated by trained physicians provides sensitivity of
         75% with speciﬁcity of 90%.

       Keywords: Colonoscopy · Coverage · Self-supervised Learning

1 Introduction

Colorectal cancer is one of the most preventable cancers, as early detection and
through screening is highly eﬀective. The most common screening procedure is
optical colonoscopy – visually examining the surface of the colon for abnormali-
ties such as colorectal lesions and polyps. However, performing a thorough exami-
nation of the entire colon surface is proven to be quite challenging due to unavoid-
able poor visibility segments of the procedure. As a consequence, improperly

c The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
S. Ali et al. (Eds.): CaPTion 2023, LNCS 14295, pp. 107–118, 2023.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45350-2_9
108 G. Leifman et al.

inspected regions may lead to a lower detection rate of polyps. Indeed, recent
studies have shown that approximately 25% of polyps are routinely missed dur-
ing a typical colonoscopy procedure [16].

    Various eﬀorts to automatically detect and mark non-inspected regions of the
colon are reported in recent publications, where the common approach relies on
the creation of a dense 3D reconstruction of the colon’s shape [8,11,24,26,27,33].
However, such a reconstruction based on video solely is a challenging task, and
especially so in colonoscopy, in which reﬂections, low-texture content, frequent
changes in lighting conditions and erratic motion are common. As a consequence,
while the above 3D approach has promise, it is limited to segments of the video
exhibiting good visual quality.

    In this work we propose a novel real-time approach for detecting deﬁcient
local coverage, complementing the 3D reconstruction methods mentioned above.
Our proposed strategy provides a reliable, stable and robust solution for the
grand challenge posed by temporal periods of poor visual content, such as camera
blur, poor camera positioning, occlusions due to dirt and spayed water, and
more. The proposed method consists of two main phases. During the ﬁrst, we
identify time segments with good visibility of the colon and gaps of poor visibility
between them. For this purpose we train a binary classiﬁer, leveraging a small set
of annotated images and a self-supervised training scheme. During the second
phase, we train an ML model that aims to answer the following question for
each gap: Do you observe diﬀerent scenes before and after the gap? (see Fig. 1).
If the answer is positive, we suspect a loss of coverage due to an unintentional
drift of the endoscope position, and therefore alert the endoscopist accordingly
in real-time to revisit the area.

    The second phase model is designed to generate low-dimensional frame-based
descriptors that are used for scene-change detection via a simple Cosine distance
evaluation. This network is trained using a contrastive loss based on automat-
ically generated positive and negative pairs of video segments. These training
examples are sampled from good-visibility segments of real colonoscopy videos,
where the translational speed of the endoscope can be reliably estimated.

    To evaluate our method we introduce a dataset of 250 colonoscopy procedures
(videos). Two doctors have been asked to evaluate up to 5 gaps per video and
decide whether they suspect loss of coverage there. The evaluation of our method
using this annotated dataset provides sensitivity of 75% with speciﬁcity of 90%.

    We note that our task of same-scene detection in the colon is related to
image retrieval [2,25,32] and geo-localization [5,19,20]. There is also some sim-
ilarity to techniques employed for face recognition [1,4,10,18] and person re-
identiﬁcation [7,21,29]. In the narrower domain of colonoscopy, the only closely
related work we are aware of is reported in [22]. While their technique for location
recognition is related to our scene descriptor generation, their eventual tasks are
markedly diﬀerent, and so are the evaluation protocols. Nevertheless, for com-
pleteness of this work, we evaluate our scene descriptors on their dataset and
show that our method outperforms their results.
    Colonoscopy Coverage Revisited: Identifying Scanning Gaps in Real-Time 109

Fig. 1. Our solution starts by detecting time segments with good visibility of the colon
and gaps between them. For each such gap we answer the question: Do you observe
diﬀerent scenes before and after the gap? If the answer is positive, the endoscopist is
alerted to revisit the area in real-time.

    To summarize, this work oﬀers three main contributions:
– We present a novel stable, robust and accurate method for detecting deﬁcient

   local coverage in real-time for periods with poor visual content.
– Our coverage solution complements the 3D reconstruction approach, covering

   cases beyond its reach;
– We introduce a novel self-supervised method for generating frame-based

   descriptors for scene change-detection in colonoscopy videos.
This paper is organized as follow: Sect. 2 describes Phase I of our method, aiming
to identify time segments with good visibility of the colon and gaps between
them. Phase II of our method is presented in Sect. 3, addressing the same-scene
question by metric learning. Section 4 summarizes the results of our experiments
and Sect. 5 concludes the paper.

2 Method: Phase I – Visibility Classiﬁcation

Our starting point is a frame-based classiﬁcation of the visibility content. We
characterize good visibility frames as those having a clear view of the tubular
structure of the colon. In contrast, poor visibility frames may include severe
occlusions due to dirt or sprayed water, a poor positioning of the camera - being
dragged on the colon walls, or simply blurred content due to rapid motion.

    In order to solve this classiﬁcation task, we gather training and validation
annotated datasets by experts. Operating on 85 diﬀerent colonoscopy videos,
5 good visibility segments and 5 poor ones were identiﬁed in each. A naive
supervised learning of a classiﬁer leads to an unsatisfactory 84% accuracy on
the validation set due to insuﬃcient data. In an attempt to improve this result,
we adopt a semi-supervised approach. First, we pre-trained an encoder on large
(1e6) randomly sampled frames using simCLR [9]. This unsupervised learning
embeds the frames such that similar ones (obtained by augmentations of the
same frame) are close-by, while diﬀerent frames (the rest of the frames in the
110 G. Leifman et al.

batch) are pushed away. Given the learned encoder, we train a binary classiﬁer
on the resulting embeddings using the labeled data. Since the dimension of the
embedding vectors is much smaller than the original frame sizes (512 vs. 2242),
this approach leads to far better accuracy of 93%. We further improve the above
by smoothing the predictions based on their embeddings, as shown in Fig. 2.
For each input batch of 512 frames, their cross-similarities (the cosine distance
between their embedding vectors) are leveraged, such that similar frames are
also encouraged to be assigned to the same class. This improves the per-frame
accuracy on the validation set up to 94%.

Fig. 2. To achieve high accuracy visibility classiﬁer, we train an encoder in an unsu-
pervised manner and then train a binary classiﬁer the resulting embeddings using the
labeled data. Further improvement is made by smoothing predictions based on simi-
larity distances, resulting in 94% accuracy on the validation set.

    To conclude, the trained classiﬁer provides a partitioning of the time axis
into disjoint intervals of good or poor visibility. In order to further relax these
intervals, we apply a median ﬁlter with window size of 10 frames.

3 Method: Phase II – Gaps with Loss of Coverage

After partitioning the procedure timeline into periods with good visibility and
gaps between them, our goal now is to identify gaps with a potential loss of cov-
erage, deﬁned as exhibiting a change of the scene between their ends. In order
to compare scenes before and after a gap, we learn distinctive frame descrip-
tors. These vectors are compared via a simple distance measure for addressing
the same/not-same scene question. While the direct approach towards this task
would be to gather a training set of many thousands of such gaps along with
their human annotation, we introduce a much cheaper, faster, and easier alter-
native based on a self-supervised approach. In this section we describe all these
ingredients in greater detail.
Colonoscopy Coverage Revisited: Identifying Scanning Gaps in Real-Time 111

3.1 Scene Descriptors

Assume that a training set of the form {F1k, F2k, ck}kN=1 is given to us, where F1k
and F2k are two frames on both sides of a given gap, and ck is their label, being
ck = 1 for the same scene and 0 otherwise. N is the size of this training data, set
in this work to be N = 1e5 examples. We design a neural network f = TΘ(F )
that embeds the frame F to the low-dimensional vector f ∈ R512, while accom-
modating our desire to serve the same/not-same scene task. More speciﬁcally,

our goal is to push same-scene descriptor-pairs to be close-by while forcing pairs

of diﬀerent scenes to be distant, being the essence of contrastive learning, which

has been drawing increased attention recently [3,9,13,30]. Therefore, we train
TΘ(·) to minimize the loss function

   N

L(Θ) = (2ck − 1)d TΘ(F1k), TΘ(F2k                                (1)

   k=1

=            d TΘ(F1k), TΘ(F2k −            d TΘ(F1k), TΘ(F2k .

   {ck =1}k                       {ck =0}k

In the above expression, d(·, ·) stands for a distance measure. In this work we
use the Cosine similarity d(f1, f2) = 1 − f1T f2/ f1 2 f2 2.

Creating the Training Data: Constructing the training set {F1k, F2k, ck}kN=1
might be a daunting challenge if annotations by experts are to be practiced. We
introduce a fully automatic alternative that builds on a reliable displacement
estimation of the endoscope, accessible in good visibility video segments of any
real colonoscopy. This displacement can be evaluated by estimating the optical-
ﬂow between consecutive frames (see [23,28]) and estimating the amount of ﬂow
trough the frame boundary [15] (see Fig. 3).

    Given any time interval of good visibility content, the cumulative directional
transnational motion can be estimated rather accurately. Thus, starting with
such a video segments, and randomly marking an inner part of it of a random

Fig. 3. Endoscope displacement estimation is based on optical-ﬂow calculation between
consecutive frames using the amount of ﬂow trough the frame boundary (see [15]).
112 G. Leifman et al.

length of 5–30 s as a pseudo-gap, we can deﬁne frames on both its ends as having
the same scene or not based on the accumulated displacement. Figure 4 presents
the whole process of creating training examples this way, easily obtaining triplets
{F1k, F2k, ck}.

    Our attempts to improve the above contrastive training scheme by introduc-
ing a margin, as practiced in [12] and employing a “soft-max” loss version [30],
did not bring a signiﬁcant improvement. A technique that delivered a beneﬁt is
to pre-train the network TΘ in fully unsupervised way using simCLR [9] (as in
Sect. 2), and proceed along the above contrastive learning scheme.

Fig. 4. We simulate random artiﬁcial gaps of various duration in good-visibility video
segments, estimate the endoscope motion within these simulated gaps, and get this way
reliable training examples for our overall task. Gaps associated with low accumulated
motion contribute a ‘same-scene’ training example (ck = 1), while high-motion gaps
refer to a diﬀerent scene pair (ck = 0).

3.2 Gap Classiﬁcation

With a simple machinery of a distance evaluation of the frame descriptors on
both ends of any gap, we are now equipped to answer our main questions: Is
there a potential loss of coverage during this poor-visibility video segment? Has
the probe drifted away form its original position? As this distance evaluation can
be applied over various frames on both sides of the gap, the challenge is to ﬁnd
a reliable fusion of the information within these many pairs of frames. While we
have experimented with various such options, the best results are achieved by
calculating a single descriptor for the scenes before and after the gap, and then
comparing these using a Cosine distance. This uniﬁed descriptor, f¯, is obtained
by a weighted average of the individual descriptors in a segment of 2 s on each
side, fi, as follows: f¯ = i fiwi/ i wi, where wi = vie−si , vi and si are the
raw visibility score and the temporal distance to the gap, both referring to the
i-th frame. While the eﬀectiveness of employing such a simple averaging of the
descriptors might seem surprising, a similar strategy was proven successful for
face recognition from multiple views in [31].
    Colonoscopy Coverage Revisited: Identifying Scanning Gaps in Real-Time 113

4 Results

As explained in Sect. 3, ﬁrst we generate per-frame scene descriptors and then
employ them to detect the gaps with potential loss of coverage. This section
starts from presenting the evaluation of the stand-alone scene descriptors and
compares them to SOTA. Then we describe the dataset of the annotated gaps
and present the evaluation of our gap classiﬁer on this dataset.

4.1 Scene Descriptors

We evaluate our scene descriptors on the recently released dataset for colono-
scopic image retrieval – Colon10K [22]. This dataset contains 20 short sequences
(10,126 images), where the positive matching images were manually labeled
and veriﬁed by an endoscopist. We follow the setup and the evaluation met-
rics described in [22]. In total, they have 620 retrieval tasks (denoted by “all ”),
while 309 tasks use the intervals that are not direct neighbor frames of their
queries as positives (denoted by “indirect”). We use the data from Colon10K
for the evaluation purposes only. Table 1 compares the results to those reported
in [22]. Rank-1 recognition rate is the percentage of tasks in which the most sim-
ilar to the query image is true positive. The Mean average precision is the area
under the precision-recall curve. For both metrics our method outperforms [22]
for both “all ” and “indirect” tasks.

Table 1. Comparison of our scene descriptor generation to [22] on the Colon10K
dataset. In all the evaluated metrics our method outperforms [22].

Rank-1 recognition rate Mean average precision (mAP)

Method all indirect  all indirect

[22] 0.9032 0.8058   0.9042 0.8245

Our 0.9131 0.8173    0.9723 0.9112

4.2 Gap Classiﬁcation

Figure 5 demonstrates an example of our gap classiﬁcation. In the top row the
case with no loss of coverage is presented, where the scene before and after the
gap is the same. In the bottom row the case with potential loss of coverage is
presented, where the scenes before and after the gap are diﬀerent.

    For quantitative evaluation of our gap classiﬁcation we introduce a dataset
of 250 colonoscopy procedures (videos) from ﬁve diﬀerent hospitals. We have
automatically identiﬁed between 2 to 5 true gaps in each video and presented
these to doctors for their annotation – whether a loss of coverage is suspected.
Each gap was evaluated by two doctors and the ones without a consensus (∼25%)
were omitted. This resulted with 750 gaps having high-conﬁdence annotations,
114 G. Leifman et al.

   t                   t + 4sec  t + 8sec   t + 12sec

t                      t + 6sec  t + 12sec  t + 18sec

Fig. 5. Qualitative evaluation of our gap classiﬁcation method. Top: no loss of coverage
detected (the scene before and after the gap is the same). Bottom: potential loss of
coverage detected (the scenes before and after the gap are diﬀerent). The gaps with
the poor visibility frames are highlighted in red. (Color ﬁgure online)

150 of which are marked as exhibiting a loss of coverage. Figure 6 presents the
ROC of our direct gap classiﬁcation method evaluated on the whole dataset
of 750 gaps. At the working point of 10% false alarms (alert on gaps with no
coverage loss) we cover 75% of gaps with real coverage loss. The area under curve
(AUC) is 0.9, which usually indicates a high-accuracy classiﬁer.

Fig. 6. Direct gap classiﬁcation: ROC curve evaluated on the whole dataset (750 gaps).
    Colonoscopy Coverage Revisited: Identifying Scanning Gaps in Real-Time 115

    The above classiﬁcation exploits the information before and after the gap,
while completely disregarding the information about the gap itself. Having a
dataset of annotated true gaps, we can improve this accuracy by a supervised
learning that exploits the gap characteristics. We thus split the dataset of the
annotated gaps 50:50 to training and evaluation. Since we have a very limited
amount of the training examples we use a low-dimensional classiﬁer – Gradient
Boosting [6] – that operates on the following input data: (i) A 32-bin histogram
of the similarity matrix’ values between frames two seconds before and after the
gap; (ii) A 32-bin histogram of the visibility scores two seconds before and after
the gap; (iii) A 32-bin histogram of the visibility scores inside the gap; and (iv)
The duration of the gap. We performed class-balancing using up-sampling with
augmentations before training.

    Table 2 compares the original approach to the supervised one, summarizing
the contribution of diﬀerent input features to the ﬁnal accuracy (measured by
AUC). In the supervised approach we use one half of the dataset for training,
thus the evaluation is performed using the other half of the dataset for both the
original and the supervised approaches. In the ﬁrst approach we also explored
a classiﬁcation based on the gap duration only, getting an AUC of 0.651, being
higher than random but lower than employing frame similarities. Weighing the
scene descriptors by the visibility scores (see Sect. 3) improves the AUC by 2%.
In the supervised approach both gap duration and visibility scores inside the
gap provide a substantial contribution of 2% each to the AUC.

Table 2. Impact of various features on the AUC, evaluated on 375 test gaps.

Method Features

            Frame similarities Gap duration Visibility inside the gap Visibility outside the gap AUC

                 0.651

Original         0.876

                 0.896

                 0.881

Supervised       0.898

                 0.929

                 0.932

4.3 Implementation Details

We employ MobilenetV3 [14] backbone both for the visibility classiﬁcation and
for the scene descriptors. The inference time of each model for a single input
image of 256 × 256 is below 20 ms, which makes our approach real-time. The
descriptor network was pre-trained for 200 epochs using simCLR [9] with learning
rate 0.005 and then we continued training on the auto-generated training data
for additional 100 epochs with learning rate 0.001, using Adam optimizer [17].
116 G. Leifman et al.

5 Conclusion

This work presents a novel method for the detection of deﬁcient local coverage
in real-time for periods with poor visual content, complementing any 3D recon-
struction alternative for coverage assessment of the colon. Our method starts
with an identiﬁcation of time segments with good visibility of the colon and
gaps between them. For each such gap we train an ML model that tests whether
the scene has changed during the gap, alerting the endoscopist in such cases to
revisit a given area in real-time. Our learning constructs frame-based descriptors
for same scene detection, leveraging a self-supervised approach for generating the
required training set. For the evaluation of the gap classiﬁcation results we have
built a dataset of 250 colonoscopy videos with annotations of gaps with deﬁcient
local coverage.

    We plan to extend our approach to a guidance of the endoscopist to the exact
place where the coverage was lost, and use our scene descriptors for bookmarking
points of interest in the colon. In order to do it we propose to use exhaustive
descriptor similarity comparison in a predeﬁned time interval. This exhaustive
search can also address the limitation of our approach during the movement of
the endoscope backwards.

References

 1. Adjabi, I., Ouahabi, A., Benzaoui, A., Taleb-Ahmed, A.: Past, present, and future
     of face recognition: a review. Electronics 9(8), 1188 (2020)

 2. Ali, S., Rittscher, J.: Eﬃcient video indexing for monitoring disease activity and
     progression in the upper gastrointestinal tract. In: 2019 IEEE 16th International
     Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI 2019), pp. 91–95. IEEE (2019)

 3. Bachman, P., Hjelm, R.D., Buchwalter, W.: Learning representations by maxi-
     mizing mutual information across views. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 32, 1–11
     (2019)

 4. Bae, G., et al.: Digiface-1m: 1 million digital face images for face recognition. In:
     Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer
     Vision, pp. 3526–3535 (2023)

 5. Berton, G., Masone, C., Paolicelli, V., Caputo, B.: Viewpoint invariant dense
     matching for visual geolocalization. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Interna-
     tional Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 12169–12178 (2021)

 6. Brownlee, J.: XGBoost With python: gradient boosted trees with XGBoost and
     scikit-learn. In: Machine Learning Mastery (2016)

 7. Chen, H., Wang, Y., Lagadec, B., Dantcheva, A., Bremond, F.: Joint generative
     and contrastive learning for unsupervised person re-identiﬁcation. In: Proceedings
     of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
     2004–2013 (2021)

 8. Chen, R.J., Bobrow, T.L., Athey, T., Mahmood, F., Durr, N.J.: Slam endoscopy
     enhanced by adversarial depth prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.00283 (2019)

 9. Chen, T., Kornblith, S., Norouzi, M., Hinton, G.: A simple framework for con-
     trastive learning of visual representations. In: International Conference on Machine
     Learning, pp. 1597–1607. PMLR (2020)
    Colonoscopy Coverage Revisited: Identifying Scanning Gaps in Real-Time 117

10. Deng, J., Guo, J., Xue, N., Zafeiriou, S.: Arcface: additive angular margin loss for
     deep face recognition. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
     Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 4690–4699 (2019)

11. Freedman, D., et al.: Detecting deﬁcient coverage in colonoscopies. IEEE Trans.
     Med. Imaging 39(11), 3451–3462 (2020)

12. Hadsell, R., Chopra, S., LeCun, Y.: Dimensionality reduction by learning an invari-
     ant mapping. In: 2006 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision
     and Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2006), vol. 2, pp. 1735–1742. IEEE (2006)

13. He, K., Fan, H., Wu, Y., Xie, S., Girshick, R.: Momentum contrast for unsupervised
     visual representation learning. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
     Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9729–9738 (2020)

14. Howard, A., et al.: Searching for mobilenetv3. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
     International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1314–1324 (2019)

15. Kelner, O., Weinstein, O., Rivlin, E., Goldenberg, R.: Motion-based weak super-
     vision for video parsing with application to colonoscopy. In: Proceedings of the
     “What is Motion for?” Workshop, ECCV (2022)

16. Kim, N.H., et al.: Miss rate of colorectal neoplastic polyps and risk factors for
     missed polyps in consecutive colonoscopies. Intest. Res. 15(3), 411 (2017)

17. Kingma, D.P., Ba, J.: Adam: a method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1412.6980 (2014)

18. Kortli, Y., Jridi, M., Al Falou, A., Atri, M.: Face recognition systems: a survey.
     Sensors 20(2), 342 (2020)

19. Lin, T.Y., Belongie, S., Hays, J.: Cross-view image geolocalization. In: Proceedings
     of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 891–898
     (2013)

20. Lin, T.Y., Cui, Y., Belongie, S., Hays, J.: Learning deep representations for ground-
     to-aerial geolocalization. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
     Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 5007–5015 (2015)

21. Lin, Y., Xie, L., Wu, Y., Yan, C., Tian, Q.: Unsupervised person re-identiﬁcation
     via softened similarity learning. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
     Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3390–3399 (2020)

22. Ma, R., et al.: Colon10k: a benchmark for place recognition in colonoscopy. In: 2021
     IEEE 18th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI), pp. 1279–1283.
     IEEE (2021)

23. Oliveira, M., Araujo, H., Figueiredo, I.N., Pinto, L., Curto, E., Perdigoto, L.: Reg-
     istration of consecutive frames from wireless capsule endoscopy for 3d motion esti-
     mation. IEEE Access 9, 119533–119545 (2021)

24. Posner, E., Zholkover, A., Frank, N., Bouhnik, M.: C3 fusion: consistent contrastive
     colon fusion, towards deep slam in colonoscopy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.01961
     (2022)

25. Radenovi´c, F., Tolias, G., Chum, O.: Fine-tuning CNN image retrieval with no
     human annotation. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 41(7), 1655–1668
     (2018)

26. Rau, A., et al.: Implicit domain adaptation with conditional generative adversarial
     networks for depth prediction in endoscopy. Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg.
     14(7), 1167–1176 (2019)

27. Shao, S., et al.: Self-supervised monocular depth and ego-motion estimation in
     endoscopy: appearance ﬂow to the rescue. Med. Image Anal. 77, 102338 (2022)

28. Sun, D., Yang, X., Liu, M.Y., Kautz, J.: Pwc-net: cnns for optical ﬂow using
     pyramid, warping, and cost volume. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
     Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8934–8943 (2018)
118 G. Leifman et al.

29. Wang, D., Zhang, S.: Unsupervised person re-identiﬁcation via multi-label classi-
     ﬁcation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
     Pattern Recognition, pp. 10981–10990 (2020)

30. Wang, F., Liu, H.: Understanding the behaviour of contrastive loss. In: Proceedings
     of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
     2495–2504 (2021)

31. Wolf, L., Hassner, T., Taigman, Y.: Descriptor based methods in the wild. In:
     Workshop on Faces in ‘Real-Life’ Images: Detection, Alignment, and Recognition
     (2008)

32. Yan, C., Gong, B., Wei, Y., Gao, Y.: Deep multi-view enhancement hashing for
     image retrieval. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 43(4), 1445–1451 (2020)

33. Zhang, S., Zhao, L., Huang, S., Ye, M., Hao, Q.: A template-based 3d reconstruc-
     tion of colon structures and textures from stereo colonoscopic images. IEEE Trans.
     Med. Rob. Bionics 3(1), 85–95 (2020)
        ColNav: Real-Time Colon Navigation
                        for Colonoscopy

Netanel Frank(B), Erez Posner , Emmanuelle Muhlethaler , Adi Zholkover,
                                     and Moshe Bouhnik

               Intuitive Surgical, Inc., 1020 Kifer Road, Sunnyvale, CA, USA
                  {netanel.frank,erez.posner,emmanuelle.muhlethaler,
                         adi.zholkover,moshe.bouhnik}@intusurg.com

         Abstract. Colorectal cancer screening through colonoscopy continues
         to be the dominant global standard, as it allows identifying pre-cancerous
         or adenomatous lesions and provides the ability to remove them during
         the procedure itself. Nevertheless, failure by the endoscopist to identify
         such lesions increases the likelihood of lesion progression to subsequent
         colorectal cancer. Ultimately, colonoscopy remains operator-dependent,
         and the wide range of quality in colonoscopy examinations among endo-
         scopists is inﬂuenced by variations in their technique, training, and dili-
         gence. This paper presents a novel real-time navigation guidance system
         for Optical Colonoscopy (OC). Our proposed system employs a real-time
         approach that displays both an unfolded representation of the colon and a
         local indicator directing to un-inspected areas. These visualizations are
         presented to the physician during the procedure, providing actionable
         and comprehensible guidance to un-surveyed areas in real-time, while
         seamlessly integrating into the physician’s workﬂow. Through coverage
         experimental evaluation, we demonstrated that our system resulted in
         a higher polyp recall (PR) and high inter-rater reliability with physi-
         cians for coverage prediction. These results suggest that our real-time
         navigation guidance system has the potential to improve the quality and
         eﬀectiveness of OC and ultimately beneﬁt patient outcomes.

       Keywords: Colonoscopy · Coverage · Real-time systems

1 Introduction

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a signiﬁcant public health issue, with over 1.9 million
new cases diagnosed globally in 2020 [5]. It is one of the most preventable types of
cancer [14], and early detection is crucial for preventing its progression [13,15].
The most commonly used screening method is optical colonoscopy (OC) [10],
which visually inspects the mucosal surface of the colon for abnormalities such
as colorectal lesions. However, the process of detecting CRC in its early stages

N. Frank and E. Posner—These authors contributed equally to this work.

c The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
S. Ali et al. (Eds.): CaPTion 2023, LNCS 14295, pp. 119–131, 2023.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45350-2_10
120 N. Frank et al.

can be diﬃcult, since performing a comprehensive examination of the colon using
OC alone can be challenging, resulting in certain regions of the colon not being
fully examined and potentially reducing the rate of polyp detection.

    To address this problem, researchers have conducted extensive studies to
propose assistive technologies that set out to provide clinicians with a better
understanding of the procedure quality. Most existing methods focus on esti-
mating measures of quality, such as the withdrawal time, or on reconstructing
a 3D model of the colon from a video sequence of the procedure, some even
try automating the entire scan procedure using robotic autonomous colonoscopy
navigation [16]. Despite the advancements in technology that allow for the pre-
diction of 3D structures from images, there is still a signiﬁcant gap in providing
useful and actionable information to clinicians during the procedure in real-
time. Current methods for detecting un-surveyed regions, which usually show a
3D visualization of the colon, are not designed to be easily understood, or inter-
acted with, during the procedure. They may not align with the camera view;
making it diﬃcult for physicians to understand where they need to move the
endoscope to survey missing regions. Other measures of quality, such as cover-
age per frame, or withdrawal time, do not provide clear, usable information to
assist during the procedure in capturing un-surveyed regions. In this paper, we
present ColNav, a novel real-time solution that (i) utilizes an unfolded represen-
tation of the colon to localize the endoscope within the colon, (ii) introduces a
local indicator that directs the physician to un-surveyed areas and (iii) is robust
to real-life issues such as tracking loss. Our approach estimates the centerline
and unfolds the scanned colon from a 3D structure to a 2D image in a way
that not only calculates the coverage, but also provides augmented guidance to
un-surveyed areas without disrupting the physician’s workﬂow. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst coverage based, real-time guidance system for
colonoscopies.

2 Related Work

In recent years, there has been an abundance of papers exploring various aspects
of quality measures for colonoscopy, with the goal of assisting clinicians and
improving the overall quality of care.

    SLAM for colonoscopy approaches usually rely on estimating a 3D recon-
struction of the colon and post-processing it in order to estimate the un-surveyed
regions (holes). Posner et al. [17] utilized deep features to better track the camera
position, presented tracking loss recovery and loop closure capabilities to create
a consistent 3D model. Ma et al. [11] reconstructed fragments of the colon using
Direct Sparse Odometry (DSO) [7] and a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) for
depth estimation. However their output is not easily understood nor meant to
be interacted with during the procedure, making them less likely to be adopted
by physicians or impact the clinical outcome.

    Direct coverage estimation methods [4,8], aim to predict the coverage on
a segment-by-segment basis by estimating what fraction of the colon has been
                               ColNav: Real-Time Colon Navigation for Colonoscopy 121

Fig. 1. Our novel, real-time colonoscopy navigation. Flattened image of the colon
(right): (1) un-surveyed areas as black pixels, (2) camera location, (3) coverage per-
centage and length covered. Endoscope view (left): (4) the local compass indicator
directing the physician to look up (ticks highlighted in red). (Color ﬁgure online)

viewed in any given segment. Freedman et al. [8] used a CNN to perform depth
estimation for each frame followed by coverage estimation. As it was trained in
a supervised manner using synthetic ground-truth coverage, it cannot be eas-
ily generalized to real data. Blau et al. [4] proposed an unsupervised learning
technique for detecting deﬁcient colon coverage segments modeled as curved
cylinders. However, their method does not run in real-time.

Indirect Quality Objective Measurements: Objective measurements of
quality in colonoscopy are important for minimizing subjective biases and vari-
ations among endoscopists. Yao et al. [23] proposed an auto-detection of non-
Informative frames and Zhou et al. [24] predicted the bowel preparation scores
every 30 s during the withdrawal phase of the procedure. However, these tech-
niques lack the ability to provide real-time information to the physician during
the procedure.

    Virtual colon unfolding is a well known visualisation technique for virtual
colonoscopy (VC), where the colon is inspected by analysing the output of a
CT scan. In such cases, a 3D mesh of the entire colon can be extracted from
the CT image volume and mapped onto a 2D grid, providing the physician
with a fast and convenient way to inspect the colon mucosa and ﬁnd polyps. A
number of solutions have been proposed to perform this mapping [9,19,20,22].
In many cases, the solution uses, as an intermediate step, the computation of the
122 N. Frank et al.

centerline, a single continuous line spanning the colon. Although most of these
methods tend to be computationally expensive, Sudarsky et al. [19] proposed a
fast unfolding method based on the straightening of the colon mesh using the
centerline. Using colon unfolding to visualize missed areas in optical colonoscopy
(OC) has been proposed in a number of works [1–3,11]. A cylindrical model of
the colon is used by [1–3] to unwrap and combine frames. This method does not
detect hidden areas behind haustral folds, nor does it handles frames in which
the camera is oriented towards the colon walls. Furthermore, it does not run
in real time and the results were only demonstrated on relatively short colon
segments. The method of Ma et al [11] is based on a more accurate SLAM
reconstruction, but colon unfolding was done oﬄine, for validation purposes, on
a few disconnected colon segments, using a single straight line as centerline. To
the best of our knowledge, no prior work shows a map of the entire colon surface
being consistently updated during the procedure.

3 Method Overview

Our pipeline, ColNav, provides actionable and comprehensible guidance to un-
surveyed areas in real-time and is seamlessly integrated into the physician’s
workﬂow. While scanning the colon, the physician is presented with 2 screens as
can be seen in Fig. 1. The colon unfolded image, presented on the right, shows
the three-dimensional (3D) colon ﬂattened into a two-dimensional (2D) image.
Black pixels in the image indicate unseen areas, which were missed during the
scan. The location of the endoscope distal tip (camera) in the unfolded colon is
visualized as the green camera frustum marker.

    When the physician withdraws the endoscope the green marker moves down,
while the ﬂattened image gets updated with new rows at the bottom. These
rows represent the newly scanned portion of the colon. If the physician decides
to move the endoscope back into the colon, the camera marker will move up.
The relevant areas which were re-scanned will then be updated, but no new
rows will be created in the ﬂattened representation. This enables the physician
to know whether to move the endoscope forwards or backwards to reach the
missed regions (holes). Coverage percentage and the overall travelled length,
computed on the scanned portion of the colon, are displayed as well.

    The left screen in Fig. 1 is the main endoscope view with a local compass
indicator directing to un-inspected areas (holes). Once the endoscope is near
an un-inspected area, the relevant sections of the compass indicator will be
highlighted in red, directing the physician towards the areas in need of further
examination.

    The ColNav algorithm, as depicted in Fig. 2, consists of three major parts: (i)
centerline estimation, (ii) multi-segment 3D to 2D unfolding, and (iii) local indi-
cator (navigation compass). The inputs of ColNav are the depth and pose of each
RGB frame. To obtain these inputs, we employ our previous work C3Fusion [17]
as a SLAM module. C3Fusion was speciﬁcally designed to deal with real life
colonoscopy issues, ﬁlter out blurry/ non-informative frames, and 3D reconstruct
the colon from OC.
                               ColNav: Real-Time Colon Navigation for Colonoscopy 123

Fig. 2. Block diagram of our ColNav method, comprised of three main parts, (i) cen-
terline estimation, (ii) multi-segment 3D to 2D unfolding, and (iii) local indicator
(navigation compass), as well as C3Fusion [17] which is employed as our SLAM mod-
ule

    The ﬁrst component of ColNav is a robust method for centerline estimation.
In the second component, the overall 2D scene representation is obtained by
merging the depth, pose, and RGB of all frames into a single ﬂattened repre-
sentation of the colon. Both components are described in Sect. 3.1. The third
component, the creation of the navigation compass, is described in Sect. 3.2. In
real-life scenarios, C3Fusion may lose track, resulting in the creation of a new
segment when the last frame cannot be connected to any previous frame. Alter-
natively, loop closure may occur, where two disjoint segments are merged, and
their poses are subsequently updated. Our system accommodates these scenarios
by (a) adjusting the previous centerline approximation based on updated poses
and (b) de-integrating frames that have changed location in the ﬂattened image
and re-integrating them with their new pose (see Sect. 3.3). In cases of tracking
loss, the ﬂattened image shows separate segments with red lines that can be
merged if tracking recovery occurs.

3.1 Centerline and Colon Unfolding

In our proposed solution, the 3D representation of each frame is obtained by
back-projecting the depth map into a point cloud. It is then mapped onto a 2D
unfolded representation, using an algorithm analogous to that described in [19].
In particular, the centerline is used for straightening the reconstructed colon
and dividing it into cross-sections perpendicular to the centerline. Each cross-
sectional slice corresponds to a row within the two-dimensional ﬂattened image,
see Fig. 3.

    The colon centerline, sometimes also referred to as the medial axis, is usually
deﬁned as a single connected line, spanning the colon and situated at its center,
away from the colon walls [21]. In our case, the centrality requirement is partly
relaxed, as we observed that a shift of the centerline away from the center of
the colon has little eﬀect on the unfolding. In ColNav, unlike prior works, the
centerline and the ﬂattened image are also updated in real time. This creates new
requirements for the centerline: (1) Fast computation. (2) Consistency over time
124 N. Frank et al.

Fig. 3. On the left: 3D point cloud of a single frame (blue), centerline (green), vertices
associated with a speciﬁc cross-section on the centerline (red) and the camera pose
indicated by the 3 axis vectors. On the right: the ﬂattened image with corresponding
cross-section (red). Note that the holes in the cross-section match the black pixels in
the corresponding row. (Color ﬁgure online)

relatively to the camera trajectory. To support these requirements, the centerline
is estimated from the camera trajectory poses.

    The centerline algorithm contains the following steps: (1) Filtering outlier
poses from the trajectory. (2) Constructing or updating a graph G of the trajec-
tory, with camera positions as nodes and edges connecting nodes within a thresh-
old distance. (3) Calculating or updating the shortest path length l between each
node n ∈ G. (4) Binning of the trajectory points according to l. (5) Fitting a
B-spline [6] to an aggregate of the trajectory points in each bin. Each time the
trajectory poses are updated, steps (1)–(5) are computed and a new centerline
is re-calculated.

Camera Position Indicator: The camera position for each frame is given by
the SLAM module and is noted by Ti = {(Ri, ti)|Ri ∈ SO(3), ti ∈ R3}Ni=1 with
N the number of frames in the sequence. To represent the endoscope current

location se on the centerline of size K, The endoscope position ti is projected on
the centerline C = {ck ∈ R3}kK=1 by querying the centerline KDTree.

                     se = arg min ||ti − ck||2, ti ∈ R3  (1)

                                     ck ∈C

3.2 Navigation Compass

The navigation compass serves as a local indicator that visually guides the
physician to areas that have been missed. Speciﬁcally, the compass ticks are
highlighted in red to indicate which speciﬁc sections of the colon require further
inspection. Based on the camera position along the centerline se, the coverage
                               ColNav: Real-Time Colon Navigation for Colonoscopy 125

information is extracted from the unfolded image F , where each column rep-
resents bθ - the rotation angle bin around the centerline axis at the endoscope
location se, with θ ∈ {0, ..., 2π}.

    When F (se, bθ) - the corresponding pixel in the extracted row - is black
(meaning, it wasn’t covered), the navigation compass tick will be highlighted in
red, otherwise it will remain dark. To make the navigation compass invariant
to camera roll, the camera orientation is projected on the centerline and the
relative angle oﬀset is computed to compensate for misalignment between the
centerline and the camera pose. Figure 3 depicts the extracted row, selected from
the ﬂattened image according to the camera location.

3.3 Unfolding Real-Time Dynamic Update

To achieve real-time and consistent unfolding of the colon, it is crucial to update
the ﬂattened image F whenever new information becomes available. This need
arises as the SLAM pipeline continually reﬁnes frames poses, updates frames seg-
ment assignment, and copes with real-life issues. To accomplish this, we closely
monitor the continuous change in frame poses and their assignment to seg-
ments, updating the ﬂattened image through the integration and de-integration
of frames. By adopting this strategy, we can rectify errors resulting from regis-
tration drift or tracking loss.

Managing Unfolding Updates: When an input frame arrives, we seek to
integrate it into the ﬂattened image as quickly as possible, to give the physician
instantaneous feedback of the colon coverage. Since previous frames segment-
assignments or poses could be updated from [17], we de-integrate and re-integrate
all frames if their segment assignment changes. In addition, we sort all frames
within each segment in descending order, based on the diﬀerence between their
previous and updated poses. After sorting, we select and re-integrate the top 10
frames from the list. This allows us to dynamically update the unfolded image
to produce a globally-consistent representation of the unfolded colon.

Integration and De-integration: Integration of an RGBD frame fi is deﬁned
as a weighted average of previous mapped samples. For each pixel p in the

ﬂattened image, let F (p) denote its color, W (p) the pixel weight, di(p) the frame’s
sample color to be integrated, and wi(p) the integration weight for a sample of
fi. Each pixel is then updated by:

F  (p)  =  F  (p)W  (p)  ±  wi(p)di  (p)  ,  W  (p)  = W (p) ± wi(p), wi(p)  =  1  (2)
                 W  (p)  ±  wi(p)

where the + sign is used for integration and the − for de-integrating a frame. A
frame in the ﬂattened image can be updated by de-integrating it from its original
pose and/or segment and integrate it with a new pose into its updated segment.
126 N. Frank et al.

4 Experiments

This section presents the validation of our solution through multiple tests, a
comparative study with partially analogous prior works being unfeasible due
to the unavailability of essential data and code. The ﬁrst test, named ‘Colon
unfolding veriﬁcation’, demonstrates that our 2D ﬂattened visualization is a
valid representation of the scanned colon. It also showcases our ability to detect
and localize ‘holes’ in the colon using this visualization. To carry out this test,
we used coverage annotations of short colonoscopy clips. Each clip was divided
into four quadrants (See Fig. 4), and two experienced physicians tagged each
quadrant based on its coverage level (‘mostly not covered’, ‘partially covered’,
‘mostly covered’). We then used ColNav to estimate the coverage of each quad-
rant and compared it to the physicians’ annotations. The second test focuses on
the clinical impacts of using our tool during procedures. We estimate coverage
and Polyp Recall (PR) with and without the real-time navigation guidance dur-
ing the scan to demonstrate the possible beneﬁts of our tool. All datasets used
are proprietary.

    We conducted all of the tests using a calibrated Olympus CF-H185L/I colono-
scope on a 3D printed colon model. The colon model was manufactured by seg-
menting a CT colon scan from [18] and post-processing it to recover the 3D
structure of the colon. The model was fabricated from the ﬁnal mesh using a 3D
printer.

    ColNav was run on a high-performance computer equipped with an AMD
Ryzen 3960x processor, 128 GB of RAM, and an NVIDIA A6000 GPU. The
algorithm ran at a speed of 20 FPS while the live endoscope stream was in its
native frequency, enabling real-time usage and guidance during the scans.

    The annotations for the ﬁrst test, and the scans in the second test were per-
formed by physicians who, on average, had 6.5 years of experience and conducted
5000 colonoscopies. We also used the baseline PR experiment (without ColNav)
as a standard, and only included physicians with a recall of over 50%.

4.1 Results

Colon Unfolding Veriﬁcation: Two physicians were asked to annotate the
coverage level of 83 short clips captured using our colon model. To assess the
annotators agreement, we used weighted Cohen’s kappa coeﬃcient [12], due to
the ordinal nature of the coverage categories. The resulting weighted kappa score
of approximately 60% indicated a “moderate” level of agreement. However, the
absolute coverage value given by a single physician might be subjective, making
calibration and comparison diﬃcult. Thus, to overcome this issue, we tested for
agreement on the relative score of the four quadrants. We used Cohen’s kappa
to measure the agreement between the physicians on the order of the sorted
quadrants based on their coverage score (most covered quadrant is ﬁrst, least
one is last). Cohen’s kappa using the relative coverage scores between the two
annotators is 84.7% meaning ‘almost perfect agreement’, which showcases that
this comparison method is more suited for the task.
ColNav: Real-Time Colon Navigation for Colonoscopy 127

Fig. 4. Left: Representative frame from an annotated clip with the annotated quadrant
numbers. Below, ColNav’s ﬂattened image of the same clip with the corresponding
quadrant numbers. Note that areas that are occluded or aren’t visible in the frame are
mostly dark in the ﬂattened image. Right: Our complete 3D model with the external
magnets that hold in place the small magnetic balls

Table 1. Weighted Cohen’s Kappa over Table 2. Polyp Recall & Coverage

the relative coverage scores.                     with/out ColNav (avg. ± std)

                               Cohen’s Kappa [%]                               PR [%] Cov. [%]
Annotators A, B 84.7                              Without ColNav 77.8 ± 3.9 91.6 ± 1.5
Anno. A, ColNav 88.4                              With ColNav 88.9 ±3.9 96.4 ±1.0
Anno. B, ColNav 85.9

    Based on this approach, we applied ColNav to compute a ﬂattened image
for each short clip. Each ﬂattened image was partitioned into four quadrants,
and the coverage percentage was calculated for each quadrant. To evaluate our
predictions, we mapped the coverage percentages to three categories using a
simple threshold: (cov. <= 60%: ‘mostly not covered’, 60% < cov. <= 80%:
‘partially covered’, 80% < cov. <= 100%: ‘mostly covered’).

    The results shown in Table 1 present ColNav high levels of agreement with
the two physicians, with agreement rates of 88.4% and 85.9% respectively. These
results demonstrate that ColNav accurately represents the scanned colon and has
high inter-rater reliability with physicians for predicting coverage levels.

Polyp Recall Impact: Real-time estimation of coverage oﬀers the crucial
advantage of guiding physicians to potentially missed areas and enhancing the
detection of polyps in these regions. To evaluate this capability, we conducted a
simulation study by concealing 18 small magnetic balls (diameter = 5 mm) along
the full extent of our colon model, thus simulating polyps (see Fig. 4, Fig. 5).

    The placement of the polyps was carefully selected so they could be con-
cealed within the colon folds, while remaining unseen unless the endoscope was
intentionally maneuvered to inspect those speciﬁc areas. Three trained physi-
128 N. Frank et al.
cians were recruited to perform an optical colonoscopy on the model, with and
without ColNav, while recording their coverage and recall, i.e. the ratio between
the number of balls detected during each test and the total number of balls.

    Scans were conducted in the same manner, starting from the end of the model
(‘cecum’), and the colon was examined while the endoscope was withdrawn. To
prevent location bias, we used balls of multiple colors and assigned each physician
a diﬀerent combination of colors in each test phase (with/without ColNav).

    The results, as presented in Table 2, reveal that physicians using ColNav
achieved 11.1% higher polyp recall (PR) and 4.8% better coverage, demonstrat-
ing the eﬀectiveness of our solution and supporting our belief that ColNav could
improve PDR in clinical scenarios.

Fig. 5. frames containing hidden magnetic balls in multiple colors, that were used to
simulate polyps. Unless the endoscope is intentionally maneuvered to inspect those
speciﬁc areas the polyps won’t be visible

Real Colonoscopy Videos: To evaluate ColNav ability to handle real OC
videos, a qualitative analysis was carried out, in which several short clips (a
few hundred frames each) of real colonoscopy procedures were selected. ColNav
was used on the recorded procedures, to unfold the colon in order to verify that
miss-scanned ares can be spotted even in real scans.
ColNav: Real-Time Colon Navigation for Colonoscopy 129

(a) reconstructed mesh  (b) ﬂattened image

Fig. 6. ColNav on real colonoscopy video segments. (a) 3D reconstructed mesh, (b)
ﬂattened image consists of all frames in the sequence. Red ellipses mark corresponding
uncovered areas. Best viewed in color. (Color ﬁgure online)

    Figure 6 shows the 3D reconstruction of the short clip alongside the ColNav
ﬂattened colon. From the results, it is evident that the system is able to detect
missing areas (circled in red) even in real colonoscopy procedures.

5 Conclusion

We have presented ColNav, the ﬁrst of its kind real-time colon navigation sys-
tem, which not only calculates coverage, but also provides augmented guidance
130 N. Frank et al.

to un-surveyed areas without disrupting the procedure. The coverage estima-
tion has been shown to have high correlation with experts. Using the system,
physicians were able to improve their coverage and recall in detecting ﬁndings
within the colon. The system was qualitatively evaluated on recorded real-life
procedures. Considering that the employed SLAM module was speciﬁcally devel-
oped to be robust to optical colonoscopy issues (specular reﬂections, texture-less
areas, motion/ﬂuid blur, minor deformations), our system was able to deal with
the real colonoscopy clips without any changes. Further research will focus on
improving real-time performance and robustness to extreme colon deformation.

References

 1. Armin, M.A., Barnes, N., Grimpen, F., Salvado, O.: Learning colon centreline from
     optical colonoscopy, a new way to generate a map of the internal colon surface.
     Healthc. Technol. Lett. 6, 187–190 (2019)

 2. Armin, M.A., Chetty, G., de Visser, H., Dumas, C., Grimpen, F., Salvado, O.:
     Automated visibility map of the internal colon surface from colonoscopy video.
     Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg. 11, 1599–1610 (2016)

 3. Armin, M.A., et al.: Visibility map: a new method in evaluation quality of optical
     colonoscopy. In: Navab, N., Hornegger, J., Wells, W.M., Frangi, A.F. (eds.) MIC-
     CAI 2015. LNCS, vol. 9349, pp. 396–404. Springer, Cham (2015). https://doi.org/
     10.1007/978-3-319-24553-9 49

 4. Blau, Y., Freedman, D., Dashinsky, V., Goldenberg, R., Rivlin, E.: Unsupervised 3d
     shape coverage estimation with applications to colonoscopy. In: 2021 IEEE/CVF
     International Conference on Computer Vision Workshops (ICCVW), pp. 3364–
     3374 (2021)

 5. International Agency for Research on Cancer: Globocan 2020: Cancer fact
     sheets-colorectal cancer. https://gco.iarc.fr/today/data/factsheets/cancers/10 8
     9-Colorectum-fact-sheet.pdf

 6. Dierckx, P.: Algorithms for smoothing data with periodic and parametric splines.
     Comput. Graph. Image Process. 20(2), 171–184 (1982)

 7. Engel, J., Koltun, V., Cremers, D.: Direct sparse odometry. IEEE Trans. Pattern
     Anal. Mach. Intell. 40, 611–625 (2018)

 8. Freedman, D., et al.: Detecting deﬁcient coverage in colonoscopies. IEEE Trans.
     Med. Imaging 39(11), 3451–3462 (2020)

 9. Haker, S., Angenent, S.B., Tannenbaum, A.R., Kikinis, R.: Nondistorting ﬂattening
     maps and the 3-d visualization of colon ct images. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 19,
     665–670 (2000)

10. Liang, Z., Richards, R.: Virtual colonoscopy vs optical colonoscopy. Expert Opin.
     Med. Diagn. 4(2), 159–169 (2010). 20473367[pmid]

11. Ma, R., et al.: Rnnslam: reconstructing the 3d colon to visualize missing regions
     during a colonoscopy. Med. Image Anal. 72, 102100 (2021)

12. McHugh, M.: Interrater reliability: the kappa statistic. Biochemia medica: asopis
     Hrvatskoga druˇstva medicinskih biokemˇcara/HDMB 22, 276–282 (2012)

13. Mirzaei, H., Panahi, M., Etemad, K., GHanbari-Motlagh, A., Holakouie-Naini,
     K.A.: Evaluation of pilot colorectal cancer screening programs in Iran. Iran. J.
     Epidemiol. 12(3), 21–28 (2016)
                               ColNav: Real-Time Colon Navigation for Colonoscopy 131

14. Mohaghegh, P., Ahmadi, F., Shiravandi, M., Nazari, J.: Participation rate, risk
     factors, and incidence of colorectal cancer in the screening program among the
     population covered by the health centers in arak, iran. Int. J. Cancer Manag.
     14(7), e113278 (2021)

15. Moshfeghi, K., Mohammadbeigi, A., Hamedi-Sanani, D., Bahrami, M.: Evaluation
     the role of nutritional and individual factors in colorectal cancer. Zahedan J. Res.
     Med. Sci. 13(4), e93934 (2011)

16. Pore, A., et al.: Colonoscopy navigation using end-to-end deep visuomotor control:
     a user study. In: 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
     and Systems (IROS), pp. 9582–9588 (2022)

17. Posner, E., Zholkover, A., Frank, N., Bouhnik, M.: C3fusion: consistent contrastive
     colon fusion, towards deep slam in colonoscopy. arXiv:2206.01961 (2022)

18. Smith, K., et al.: Data from ct colonography. Cancer Imaging Arch. (2015)
19. Sudarsky, S., Geiger, B., Chefd’hotel, C., Guendel, L.: Colon unfolding via skeletal

     subspace deformation. In: Metaxas, D., Axel, L., Fichtinger, G., Sz´ekely, G. (eds.)
     MICCAI 2008. LNCS, vol. 5242, pp. 205–212. Springer, Heidelberg (2008). https://
     doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-85990-1 25
20. Vilanova Bartroli, A., Wegenkittl, R., Konig, A., Groller, E.: Nonlinear virtual
     colon unfolding. In: Proceedings Visualization, VIS 2001, pp. 411–579 (2001).
     https://doi.org/10.1109/VISUAL.2001.964540
21. Wan, M., Liang, Z., Ke, Q., Hong, L., Bitter, I., Kaufman, A.: Automatic centerline
     extraction for virtual colonoscopy. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 21(12), 1450–1460
     (2002)
22. Wang, G., McFarland, G., Brown, B., Vannier, M.: Gi tract unraveling with curved
     cross sections. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 17(2), 318–322 (1998)
23. Yao, H., Stidham, R.W., Soroushmehr, R., Gryak, J., Najarian, K.: Automated
     detection of non-informative frames for colonoscopy through a combination of deep
     learning and feature extraction. In: 2019 41st Annual International Conference of
     the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), pp. 2402–2406
     (2019)
24. Zhou, J., et al.: A novel artiﬁcial intelligence system for the assessment of bowel
     preparation (with video). Gastrointest. Endosc. 91(2), 428-435.e2 (2020)
             Modeling Barrett’s Esophagus
     Progression Using Geometric Variational

                          Autoencoders

        Vivien van Veldhuizen1(B), Sharvaree Vadgama1, Onno de Boer2,
                           Sybren Meijer2, and Erik J. Bekkers1

                  1 University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
                            vivien.van.veldhuizen@hotmail.com

       2 Amsterdam University Medical Centres, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

         Abstract. Early detection of Barrett’s Esophagus (BE), the only known
         precursor to Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC), is crucial for eﬀectively
         preventing and treating esophageal cancer. In this work, we investigate
         the potential of geometric Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) to learn a
         meaningful latent representation that captures the progression of BE.
         We show that hyperspherical VAE (S-VAE ) and Kendall Shape VAE
         show improved classiﬁcation accuracy, reconstruction loss, and gener-
         ative capacity. Additionally, we present a novel autoencoder architec-
         ture that can generate qualitative images without the need for a varia-
         tional framework while retaining the beneﬁts of an autoencoder, such as
         improved stability and reconstruction quality.

       Keywords: Oncology · Pathology · Variational Autoencoders ·
       Geometric Deep Learning · Equivariance · Representation Learning

1 Introduction

Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) is an aggressive type of cancer with a gener-
ally poor prognosis that could beneﬁt from recent advances in machine learning,
as it is often diagnosed at a late stage. The only known precursor to EAC, Bar-
rett’s Esophagus (BE), progresses through diﬀerent stages [17] (Fig. 1), providing
an opportunity for early detection and prevention. Currently, the detection of
dysplasia relies on subjective assessment by pathologists. Advancements in deep
learning have introduced the concept of a digital pathologist using convolutional
neural networks [9,14]. However, while these models have shown promise, they
are limited by a high degree of interobserver variability in labeled training data
[18]. In this work, we explore the potential of unsupervised learning through var-
ious forms of Variational Auto-Encoders (VAEs) [10] in the context of biomarker
research. We utilize an unsupervised representation learning approach in order
to obtain objective tissue representations and explore to what extent learned
representations form a complete description of the tissue by quantifying how

c The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
S. Ali et al. (Eds.): CaPTion 2023, LNCS 14295, pp. 132–142, 2023.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45350-2_11
                                      Modeling BE Progression Using Geometric VAEs 133

Fig. 1. Diﬀerent stages of progression: regular squamous epithelium, non-dysplastic
BE, low-grade dysplastic BE, high-grade dysplastic BE, and EAC

well an input sample can be reconstructed from the latent representation (I),
are meaningful in the context of BE by investigating how well classiﬁers can
predict tissue stage, taking only the latent representations as input (II), and are
interpretable by exploring the generative capabilities of learned models (III).

    In the context of representation learning, we refer to interpretability as both
the capability of generating images from latents (thus providing visual interpre-
tation) and the ability to interpolate between learned representations. That is,
in an ideal scenario, the latent space is organized in regions that correspond to
diﬀerent stages of BE, and interpolation would correspond to a smooth tran-
sitioning from healthy towards cancerous tissue via NDBE, LGD and HGD. It
is known, however, that interpolation using VAEs suﬀers from latent-space dis-
tortion, in which case nonsensical images are generated along the trajectory [4].
This can be avoided through geometric modeling of latent spaces (Sect. 1.1).

    In this paper we explore the importance of geometric latent space modeling
by comparing hyperspherical VAEs [7] to normal VAEs, and explore a recently
proposed equivariant variant [16] that allows us to be insensitive to the arbitrary
orientation in which tissue is imaged under a microscope [11]. In particular, we
address the objectives I-III through an extensive empirical study that compares
diﬀerent variants of (V)AEs: variational vs. non-variational; normal Euclidean
vs. hyperspherical latent spaces; equivariant vs. equivariant architectures. Addi-
tionally, we solve the problem of hyperspherical VAEs being limited to small
latent-space sizes, by proposing a new loss that turns hyperspherical autoen-
coders into generative models.

1.1 Related Work
In clinical settings, BE is diagnosed through endoscopic surveillance, where biop-
sies are taken from the esophagus lining and examined under a microscope. The
Vienna criteria [18] are used to classify the severity of dysplasia in BE, which is
subdivided into Non-Dysplastic Barrett’s Esophagus (NDBE), Low-Grade Dys-
plasia (LGD), High-Grade Dysplasia (HGD), and an indeﬁnite class for uncer-
tain diagnoses. Pathologists use speciﬁc tissue grading features, such as clonal-
134 V. van Veldhuizen et al.

ity, surface maturation, glandular structure architecture, cytonuclear abnormali-
ties, and inﬂammation, to make accurate classiﬁcations [17]. Such morphological
changes can be captured in the latent space of a variational autoencoder.

    To mitigate the distortion issue of the original VAE, various VAEs utilizing
non-Euclidean manifold have been proposed, such as Riemannian [1,5,12,15],
elliptic [2,8,13], or hyperbolic [7]. Notably, Davidson et al. [7] proposes a spher-
ical VAE framework (S-VAE ) that operates on a hyperspherical latent space,
allowing for more ﬂexible and distortion-free representations. Furthermore, in
the context of medical imaging, Lafarge et al. [11] introduced an equivariant
VAE model (SE (2)-VAE), to tackle the issue of encoding irrelevant information,
speciﬁcally orientation and translation. The SE(2)-VAE extends the traditional
VAE with a group-convolutional neural network [6], enabling the model to be
invariant to arbitrary rotations and translations. Building upon these advance-
ments, Vadgama et al. [16] proposed the KS-VAE framework, combining a hyper-
spherical latent space and an orientation-disentangled group-convolutional net-
work.

2 Method

2.1 VAEs and Hyperspherical VAEs

VAEs [10] are powerful unsupervised learning models based on the assumption
that data is generated via x = D(z) + with random noise and D a so-called
decoder, that decodes the data content from a low-dimensional latent variable.
It deﬁnes a conditional data distribution p(x|z), the likelihood, which together
with a prior distribution p(z) on the latent space deﬁnes a distribution on the
data space from which one can generate (sample) new data points. One is typ-
ically interested in obtaining the compressed latent variable z for a given input
x, which can probabilistically be done via the posterior p(z|x). However, the
computation of the true posterior is typically intractable and one thus resorts to
approximating it with a distribution q(z|x) that is parameterized by an encoder
neural network E. Via the approximation, one does not directly maximize the
(marginal) data-evidence, but instead the Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO) [10]:

          LELBO = Eq(z|x)[log p(x|z)] − KL(q(z|x)||p(z)),    (1)

which consists of a reconstruction loss (measuring ﬁdelity of reconstructed data)
and the KL divergence between the approximate posterior and prior on z.

    When the latent space is Euclidean, the approximate posterior q(z|x) and
prior p(z) are usually normally distributed, with the parameters of q(z|x)
obtained via the encoder network, and those of p(z) set as hyperparameters.
For hyperspherical latent spaces we need an equivalent of the normal distribu-
tion, which is given by the von Mises-Fisher (vMF) distribution:

          q(z  |  μ, κ)  =         κm/2−1     exp  κμT z  ,  (2)
                            (2π)m/2Im/2−1(κ)
                                      Modeling BE Progression Using Geometric VAEs 135

where the mean μ is a unit vector ( μ = 1), κ is a precision parameter, and In(κ)
denotes the modiﬁed Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind at order n = (m/2 − 1).
For the special case of κ = 0, the vMF represents a Uniform distribution on the
(m − 1)-dimensional hypersphere U Sm−1 . The closed form for KL divergence
term between a uniform distribution and vMF distribution is derived in [7].

    A key element of hyperspherical VAEs is that, due to the compactness of
the latent space, it is possible to work with uniform priors that make sure that
the entire latent space is utilized and every z ∈ Sm−1 corresponds to a sensible
data point x. In contrast, in Euclidean VAEs mass in the prior p(z) is typically
centered around the origin. Thus, only a fraction of the space is used, resulting
in ineﬃciency and challenges in eﬀectively modeling and separating clusters in
the latent space. Hyperspherical models do not suﬀer from these limitations.

2.2 Generative Hyperspherical Autoencoder Through a New Loss

Hyperspherical VAEs are known to be limited in generative capabilities when the
dimensionality of the hypersphere m becomes large, due to instability in sam-
pling from the posterior vMF distributions [7]. We solve this issue by leveraging
the fact that, due to the uniform prior, the entire latent space is covered. That
is, every z ∈ Sm−1 will equally likely generate a realistic sample of the learned
data distribution. We then propose to avoid having to sample during training, by
training an autoencoder (usually trained with only the reconstruction loss) with
an additional loss that encourages a uniform coverage of data in the latent space
which we call the spread loss. The spread loss maximizes the distance between
encoded data points in a batch via

           N

Lspread =         −ziT zj ,  (3)

           i,j=1

where we note that maximizing the true distance d(zi, zj) = arccos(ziT zj) is
equal to minimizing (hence minus sign in (3)) their inner products zTi zj. An
example visualizing the eﬀects of spread loss is shown in Fig. 2.

2.3 Roto-Equivariant VAE and KS-VAE

In addition to exploring diﬀerent geometric latent spaces, we also investigate the
idea of learning orientation-disentangled representations. Classic convolutional
neural networks are not equivariant to rotation, causing the same image patches
in diﬀerent orientations to result in diﬀerent learned representation vectors. Since
orientation of scanned biopsies is arbitrary and the intrinsic properties remain
unaltered by rotations, we want to learn rotation invariant representations.

    We modify (V)AEs to be rotation equivariant based on the method and code
of [3]. We note that equivariance means that if the input rotates, the encoded
latent transforms in a predictable manner via an action of the rotation group on
the latent space. We follow the approach by Vadgama et al. [16] which utilizes an
136 V. van Veldhuizen et al.

[S-AE without spread loss.]   [S-AE with with spread loss.]

Fig. 2. Visualization of 3-D Latent Space for model S-AE without and with spread
loss. The same batch of 200 images was encoded by both models, and diﬀerent image
classes are visualized with diﬀerent colored points. It can be observed that the points
encoded by the model trained with spread loss cover a signiﬁcantly larger area of the
sphere

equivariant encoder to obtain the latent representation z, together with a pose
R ∈ SO(2) (a rotation matrix), which can be utilized to map z to a canonical
pose z0 = ρ(R−1)z, with ρ a representation of the rotation group acting on the
latent space Sm−1. In their work it is shown that if the hyperspherical latent
space is of dimension (n − 1) ∗ 2 − 1, the latents z can be interpreted and visual-
ized as shapes/visual symbols that consist of n two-dimensional landmarks in a
Kendall shape space. The approach is similar to the equivariant VAEs developed
by Lafarge et al. [11], except that [16] canonicalizes latents z via a predicted pose
R, and that our approach has a hyperspherical instead of Euclidean latent space.

3 Experiments

3.1 Dataset

We train the models on a proprietary dataset retrieved from the Department of
Pathology of the Amsterdam University Medical Centers and the LANS-panel
(Dutch expert board of esophageal cancer). This dataset consists of digitized
and annotated H&E-stained endoscopic biopsies containing diﬀerent BE progres-
sion stages. Additionally, we use the BOLERO dataset, which includes biopsies
assessed by a panel of expert BE pathologists [18]. Combining these datasets,
we have a total of 934 biopsies from 324 patients. We use the BOLERO dataset
as the test data. We also reserve 10% of the training set as a validation dataset.

    The biopsies were digitized using a Philips Intellisite Ultrafast scanner and
stored as Whole-Slide Images (WSIs), which are highly precise scans of glass
slides containing multiple biopsies at various magniﬁcation levels. We preprocess
the data by dividing the WSIs into smaller patches of size 64 × 64. See also
                                      Modeling BE Progression Using Geometric VAEs 137

Fig. 3. To ensure suﬃcient context, we choose a magniﬁcation level of 5× and
only include patches with a threshold of 50% or more relevant tissue (squamous,
NDBE, LGD, or HGD classes). Patch labels are computed based on pathologists’
annotations in accompanying segmentation ﬁles, with the label determined by
the dominant class within each patch. To balance the dataset and account for
class imbalances, we stratify the dataset by selecting the 8,000 patches for each
class, resulting in a balanced dataset of 32,000 patches.

       Fig. 3. Example of WSI and extracted image patches

3.2 Experimental Setup

We refer to hyperspherical and normal Euclidean VAEs as S-VAE and vanilla-
VAE respectively. In our experiments, we investigate representation learning
models over three axes: 1) We compare hyperspherical to Euclidean latent
spaces, 2) for each model we test both an equivariant (G-CNN) and non-
equivariant (standard CNN) version, 3) we compare variational versus non-
variational autoencoders. We employ the same architecture for all models, based
on the work of Lafarge et al. [11]. The encoder consists of three ConvNeXt
blocks followed by max pooling, while the decoder mirrors this structure. The

        Table 1. Reconstruction losses on test dataset

Normal                              Spherical

Non-Equivariant Equivariant         Non-Equivariant Equivariant

M VAE   AE  Eq. VAE Eq. AE          S-VAE S-AE Eq. S-VAE         Eq. S-AE
                                                                 –
3 1895.56 2013.46 –         –       1930.60 2089.98 –            2103.27
                                                                 1313.58
8 1807.06 1769.14 2103.47 2103.35   1707.14 1743.25 2103.66      1135.50
                                                                 992.39
16 1635.89 1621.97 1290.60 1252.64  1563.19 1607.79 1303.07      853.75
                                                                 703.88
32 1435.60 1428.11 1161.32 1134.30  1389.64 1403.93 1142.24      540.13

64 1260.85 1273.44 993.94   988.42  1250.45 1258.50 1009.90

128 1092.88 1113.56 857.40  853.79  1133.33 1104.18 902.82

256 904.53 935.09 710.22    706.50  1056.68 925.07 826.10

512 748.42 736.92 562.11    556.61  –          727.06 –
138 V. van Veldhuizen et al.

non-equivariant variational models generate parameters for the relevant poste-
rior distribution, while the equivariant models also predict a pose per sample
[16]. We train all models for 500 epochs with a batch size of 128, utilizing the
Adam optimizer and MSE loss. We pad and normalize input images, excluding
outer edges for equivariant models during reconstruction loss computation.

    To fairly compare the models, we vary the latent dimension size and test
sizes 3, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, and 512. As observed in previous research by
Davidson et al. [7] and conﬁrmed in our experiments, high dimensions (> 32)
pose numerical instability for spherical models. To mitigate this instability, we
introduce a minimum value of κ (set at κ = 100) which enables successful train-
ing of spherical autoencoders and VAEs up to a dimension size of 256. However,
it is important to note that this approach limits the expressivity of the model,
and this trade-oﬀ will be taken into account during result analysis.

4 Results

The experiments address three qualities of representation learning with the fol-
lowing questions: (I) are the learned representations complete (from a compres-
sion perspective); (II) are the learned representation semantically meaningful?;
(III) what are the generative capabilities of each model?

Table 2. Classiﬁcation Accuracy of Latent Representations on Test Dataset

Normal                               Spherical

Non-Equivariant Equivariant          Non-Equivariant Equivariant

M VAE AE CNN Eq. VAE Eq. AE Eq. CNN S-VAE S-AE Eq. S-VAE Eq. S-AE

3 0.25 0.26 0.46 –       –     –     0.25  0.26  –                –

8 0.33 0.35 0.48 0.34    0.17  0.45  0.36  0.33  0.23             0.27

16 0.39 0.40 0.47 0.39   0.42  0.52  0.40  0.34  0.34             0.30

32 0.41 0.40 0.46 0.47   0.46  0.50  0.41  0.31  0.49             0.46

64 0.45 0.40 0.45 0.40   0.41  0.54  0.39  0.41  0.40             0.43

128 0.42 0.42 0.47 0.40  0.40  0.51  0.40  0.39  0.40             0.28

256 0.42 0.42 0.51 0.38  0.40  0.50  0.40  0.41  0.39             0.24

512 0.38 0.36 0.47 0.38  0.39  0.51  –     0.37  –                0.25

    Table 1 addresses (I) following the idea that minimal information is lost if
the decoder can reconstruct the input from the latent representation z. Here
we observe the following: 1) increasing latent dimension size improves recon-
struction ﬁdelity; 2) the diﬀerence in variational vs non-variational autoencoders
is small, but gets more pronounced in the hyperspherical showing that non-
variational methods are preferred for compression; 3) equivariant methods have
better reconstructions than non-equivariant ones; 4) hyperspherical latent space
models outperform Euclidean ones.
                                      Modeling BE Progression Using Geometric VAEs 139

    Table 2 characterizes the semantic meaning of learned representations (II) by
testing how well we can train a classiﬁer to categorize a given latent z into each of
the classes as given in Fig. 1. As a baseline, we trained a model with the default
encoder architecture to directly predict class from the input patch. This should
provide an upper bound on classiﬁcation performance, as this model has access to
all available (uncompressed) data to do the classiﬁcation. The baseline accuracy
(upper bound) is 0.51 for non-equivariant and 0.54 for equivariant CNN variants.
From Table 2 we make the following observations: 1) Latent dimensions 32 and 64
consistently achieve the highest accuracy across models; 2) hyperspherical VAEs
overall give the best performance; 3) the performance of latent space classiﬁers
is close to the upper bound, suggesting that semantic meaning is preserved by
the encoders.

    To gain insight into the generative capabilities and visual interpretability
(III) of the learned latent spaces, we sample vectors from random latent locations
in all trained models and dimension sizes. Figure 4 showcases one sample per
model and dimension size, demonstrating the general diﬀerences between the
models. In terms of these generated images, a noticeable trend is the decrease in
quality for higher dimension sizes across almost all models. Lower dimensions (3,
8, and 16) produce rough, blurry shapes with limited detail. However, in higher
dimensions, images become less realistic, losing shapes and introducing colors not
present in the original dataset. The only models capable of generating realistic
images consistent with reconstructions in higher dimensions are the spherical
VAE and its equivariant counterpart. Among these models, equivariant S-VAE
exhibits slightly more biopsy patch-like structures. However, even the best models
generate images that are too blurry to consider them interpretable.

Fig. 4. Randomly generated images from all model types. Each column shows one
sample from a model trained with a speciﬁc latent dimension size

    Finally, to evaluate our novel S-AE model and determine its potential as a
generative model, we examine the eﬀects of spread loss on the spherical autoen-
coder model by evaluating randomly generated images. From these images,
140 V. van Veldhuizen et al.

Fig. 5. Randomly image samples generated by S-VAE and S-AE with spread Loss, for
a range of latent dimension sizes

shown in Fig. 5, it becomes apparent that the introduction of spread loss to the
spherical autoencoder substantially improves the quality of generated images.
While generated images of autoencoder models previously looked unrealistic,
with spread loss they resemble those generated by the variational models.

5 Discussion

Although the experiments provide important insights when it comes to design
choices of (V)AEs, which we summarize in the conclusion, we also want to note
in what sense the experiments are limited. Firstly, the ﬁdelity of reconstruc-
tions and generated samples are not yet at the level one hopes for in a context
of interpretability. In comparison, the equivariant VAE of [11], whose neural
network architecture we used as a baseline, gave high quality images of single
nuclei. However, when scaling up to larger tissue areas, thus including clusters
of cells, image quality degrades. We believe this is due to the large variability
of cell positionings, their morphology and appearance. It seems that the image
space is simply too diverse to be captured with the studied VAEs. The fact that
the notion of equivariance and hyperspherical latents signiﬁcantly improve image
quality provides promising leads for future research.

    Secondly, we explored capabilities to learn semantically meaningful represen-
tations via a classiﬁcation analysis. Although the best methods came close to
empirically found upper bounds on performance, the bounds themselves showed
quite some room for improvement. I.e., ideally, the bound would be close to
100% accuracy. The reasons we believe this is not achieved are two-fold. 1) We
had to limit patch-size (and thus context window) in order to obtain reason-
able image reconstructions with the (V)AEs. Going beyond this would further
degrade reconstructed image quality, however, it would have given more context
for the baseline classiﬁer. 2) The labeling of tissue patches is a highly variable and
subjective manual task. This is precisely the motivation for why we are investi-
gating unsupervised learning methods. Nevertheless, the experiments show that
neural networks can pick up on consistent semantic cues in an unsupervised
manner.
                                      Modeling BE Progression Using Geometric VAEs 141

6 Conclusion

In this study, we explored the application of several variants of VAE to learn
tissue representations in an unsupervised manner, with the intent to develop
tools that contribute to an objective understanding of the progression of Bar-
rett’s esophagus. Our contributions are threefold: 1) the experimental analysis of
(V)AE variants showed the importance of equivariance and hyperspherical latent
space modeling; 2) it showed the potential (latent representations can be seman-
tically meaningful) and limitations (image generations show room for improve-
ment) of generative unsupervised representation learning; and 3) we showed that
one can train generative autoencoders in a non-variational setting without com-
promising on performance. Our novel spread loss allowed to train generative
autoencoders without having to rely on a sampling, thereby circumventing the
problem of limited latent space dimension of hyperspherical VAEs. Our study
showed the stability of generative models with hyperspherical latent spaces and
establishes a strong basis for further representation analysis via e.g., cluster
analysis or interpolation experiments. We presented ﬁrst steps towards a quan-
titative understanding of the latent space of esophageal tissue and how it could
be organized along the axis of progression from healthy to cancerous tissue.

References

 1. Arvanitidis, G., Hansen, L.K., Hauberg, S.: Latent space oddity: on the curvature
     of deep generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.11379 (2017)

 2. Bachmann, G., B´ecigneul, G., Ganea, O.: Constant curvature graph convolutional
     networks. In: International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 486–496. PMLR
     (2020)

 3. Bekkers, E.J., Lafarge, M.W., Veta, M., Eppenhof, K.A.J., Pluim, J.P.W., Duits,
     R.: Roto-translation covariant convolutional networks for medical image analysis.
     In: Frangi, A.F., Schnabel, J.A., Davatzikos, C., Alberola-L´opez, C., Fichtinger,
     G. (eds.) MICCAI 2018. LNCS, vol. 11070, pp. 440–448. Springer, Cham (2018).
     https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-00928-1 50

 4. Chadebec, C., Mantoux, C., Allassonni`ere, S.: Geometry-aware hamiltonian vari-
     ational auto-encoder (2020)

 5. Chen, N., Klushyn, A., Kurle, R., Jiang, X., Bayer, J., Smagt, P.: Metrics for
     deep generative models. In: International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and
     Statistics, pp. 1540–1550. PMLR (2018)

 6. Cohen, T., Welling, M.: Group equivariant convolutional networks. In: Interna-
     tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2990–2999. PMLR (2016)

 7. Davidson, T.R., Falorsi, L., De Cao, N., Kipf, T., Tomczak, J.M.: Hyperspherical
     variational auto-encoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.00891 (2018)

 8. Gu, A., Sala, F., Gunel, B., R´e, C.: Learning mixed-curvature representations in
     product spaces. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (2018)

 9. Hussein, M., et al.: A new artiﬁcial intelligence system successfully detects and
     localises early neoplasia in barrett’s esophagus by using convolutional neural net-
     works. United Eur. Gastroenterol. J. 10(6), 528–537 (2022)

10. Kingma, D.P., Welling, M.: Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1312.6114 (2013)
142 V. van Veldhuizen et al.

11. Lafarge, M.W., Pluim, J.P., Veta, M.: Orientation-disentangled unsupervised rep-
     resentation learning for computational pathology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.11673
     (2020)

12. Shao, H., Kumar, A., Thomas Fletcher, P.: The riemannian geometry of deep
     generative models. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
     and Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp. 315–323 (2018)

13. Skopek, O., Ganea, O.E., B´ecigneul, G.: Mixed-curvature variational autoencoders.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.08411 (2019)

14. de Souza Jr, L.A., et al.: A survey on barrett’s esophagus analysis using machine
     learning. Comput. Biol. Med. 96, 203–213 (2018)

15. Tosi, A., Hauberg, S., Vellido, A., Lawrence, N.D.: Metrics for probabilistic geome-
     tries. arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.7432 (2014)

16. Vadgama, S., Tomczak, J.M., Bekkers, E.J.: Kendall shape-vae: learning shapes in
     a generative framework. In: NeurIPS 2022 Workshop on Symmetry and Geometry
     in Neural Representations (2022)

17. Van der Wel, M., Jansen, M., Vieth, M., Meijer, S.: What makes an expert barret’s
     histopathologist?, vol. 908, pp. 137–159 (2016)

18. van der Wel, M.J., Coleman, H.G., Bergman, J.J., Jansen, M., Meijer, S.L.:
     Histopathologist features predictive of diagnostic concordance at expert level
     among a large international sample of pathologists diagnosing barret’s dysplasia
     using digital pathology. Gut 69(5), 811–822 (2020)
                                Author Index

A                               H
Abi-Nader, Clément 68           Honoré, Charles 3
Ali, Sharib 40
                                K
B                               Kadoury, Samuel 17
Bekkers, Erik J. 132            Kligvasser, Idan 107
Bercea, Cosmin I. 55
Bloch, Isabelle 68              L
Bône, Alexandre 68              Lang, Daniel M. 55
Bouhnik, Moshe 119              Le, Van-Linh 3
                                Le, William 17
C                               Leblond, Frédéric 17
Cerda, Obed 40                  Leifman, George 107
Chen, Qianqian 94               Le-Loarer, Francois 3
Coindre, Jean-Michel 3          Li, Zhenhui 94
Crombé, Amandine 3
Cui, Zhiming 94                 M
                                Masood, Anum 29
D                               Mata, Christian 83
Dallaire, Frédérick 17          Meijer, Sybren 132
David, Sandryne 17              Ménard, Cynthia 17
de Boer, Onno 132               Michot, Audrey 3
de Lange, Thomas 40             Muhlethaler, Emmanuelle 119

E                               N
Elad, Michael 107               Naseem, Usman 29
                                Nasim, Mehwish 29
F                       40, 83  Ngo, Carine 3
Feng, Qianjin 94
Flores-Araiza, Daniel           O
Frank, Netanel 119              Ochoa-Ruiz, Gilberto 40, 83

G                               P
Gao, Fei 94                     Posner, Erez 119
Giryes, Raja 55
Goldenberg, Roman 107           Q
Gonzalez-Mendoza, Miguel 83     Quihui-Rubio, Pablo Cesar 83
Gori, Pietro 68
Grajales, David 17

© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license
to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
S. Ali et al. (Eds.): CaPTion 2023, LNCS 14295, pp. 143–144, 2023.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45350-2
144                                                                      Author Index

R                             T
Rivlin, Ehud 107              Tran, Trang 17
Rohé, Marc-Michel 68
                              V
S                             Vadgama, Sharvaree 132
Saut, Olivier 3               Valencia, Flor Helena 40
Schnabel, Julia A. 55         van Veldhuizen, Vivien 132
Schwartz, Eli 55              Vétil, Rebeca 68
Sheehy, Guillaume 17          Vullierme, Marie-Pierre 68
Shen, Dinggang 94
Subramanian, Venkataraman 40  Z
                              Zhang, Jiadong 94
                              Zholkover, Adi 119
                              Zhou, Luping 94
